The Project Gutenberg eBook of Eminent literary and scientific men of
Italy, Spain, and Portugal Vol. 2 (of 3), by James Montgomery

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Eminent literary and scientific men of Italy, Spain, and
       Portugal Vol. 2 (of 3)

Author: James Montgomery
        Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley

Editor: Dionysius Lardner

Release Date: April 19, 2021 [eBook #65110]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Laura Natal Rodrigues at Free Literature (Images generously
             made available by The Internet Archive.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMINENT LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC
MEN OF ITALY, SPAIN, AND PORTUGAL VOL. 2 (OF 3) ***

THE

CABINET CYCLOPÆDIA.



CONDUCTED BY THE

REV. DIONYSIUS LARDNER, LL.D. F.R.S. L. & E.

M.R.I.A. F.R.A.S. F.L.S. F.Z.S. Hon. F.C.P.S. &c. &c.



ASSISTED BY

EMINENT LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC MEN.




EMINENT
LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC MEN
OF ITALY, SPAIN AND PORTUGAL.



VOL. II.



LONDON:

PRINTED FOR

LONGMAN, REES, ORME, BROWN, GREEN, & LONGMAN,

PATERNOSTER-ROW;

AND JOHN TAYLOR,

UPPER GOWER STREET.

1835.




CONTENTS
GALILEO
GUICCIARDINI
VITTORIA COLONNA
GUARINI
TASSO
CHIABRERA
TASSONI
MARINI
FILICAJA
METASTASIO
GOLDONI
ALFIERI
MONTI
UGO FOSCOLO




LIVES

OF

EMINENT

LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC MEN.




GALILEO

1564-1642.


The history of the life and labours of Galileo is pregnant with a
peculiar interest to the general reader, as well as to the philosopher.
His brilliant discoveries, the man of science regards as his peculiar
property; the means by which they were made, and the developement of his
intellectual character, belong to the logician and to the philosopher;
but the triumphs and the reverses of his eventful life must be claimed
for our common nature, as a source of more than ordinary instruction.

The lengthened career which Providence assigned to Galileo was filled up
throughout its rugged outline with events even of dramatic interest. But
though it was emblazoned with achievements of transcendent magnitude,
yet his finest discoveries were the derision of his contemporaries, and
were even denounced as crimes which merited the vengeance of Heaven.
Though he was the idol of his friends, and the favoured companion of
princes, yet he afterwards became the victim of persecution, and spent
some of his last hours within the walls of a prison; and though the
Almighty granted him, as it were, a new sight to descry unknown worlds
in the obscurity of space, yet the eyes which were allowed to witness
such wonders, were themselves doomed to be closed in darkness.

Such were the lights and shadows in which history delineates


"The starry Galileo with his woes."[1]


But, however powerful be their contrasts, they are not unusual in their
proportions. The balance which has been struck between his days of good
and evil, is that which regulates the lot of man, whether we study it in
the despotic sway of the autocrat, in the peaceful enquiries of the
philosopher, or in the humbler toils of ordinary life.

Galileo Galilei was born at Pisa, on the 15th of February, 1564, and was
the eldest of a family of three sons and three daughters. Under the name
of Bonajuti, his noble ancestors had filled high offices at Florence;
but about the middle of the 14th century they seem to have abandoned
this surname for that of Galileo. Vincenzo Galilei, our author's father,
was himself a philosopher of no mean powers; and though his talents seem
to have been applied only in the composition of treatises on the theory
and practice of music, yet he appears to have anticipated even his son
in a just estimate of the philosophy of the age, and in a distinct
perception of the true method of investigating truth.[2]

The early years of Galileo were, like those of almost all great
experimental philosophers, spent in the construction of instruments and
pieces of machinery, which were calculated chiefly to amuse himself and
his school-fellows. This occupation of his hands, however, did not
interfere with his regular studies; and though, from the straitened
circumstances of his father, he was educated under considerable
disadvantages, yet he acquired the elements of classical literature, and
was initiated into all the learning of the times. Music, drawing, and
painting were the occupations of his leisure hours; and such was his
proficiency in these arts, that he was reckoned a skilful performer on
several musical instruments, especially the lute; and his knowledge of
pictures was held in great esteem by some of the best artists of his
day.

Galileo seems to have been desirous, of following the profession of a
painter: but his father had observed decided indications of early
genius; and, though by no means able to afford it, he resolved to send
him to the university to pursue the study of medicine. He accordingly
enrolled himself as a scholar in arts at the university of Pisa, on the
5th of November, 1581, and pursued his medical studies under the
celebrated botanist Andrew Cæsalpinus, who filled the chair of medicine
from 1567 to 1592.

In order to study the principles of music and drawing, Galileo found it
necessary to acquire some knowledge of geometry. His father seems to
have foreseen the consequences of following this new pursuit, and though
he did not prohibit him from reading Euclid under Ostilio Ricci, one of
the professors at Pisa, yet he watched his progress with the utmost
jealousy, and had resolved that it should not interfere with his medical
studies. The demonstrations, however, of the Greek mathematician had too
many charms for the ardent mind of Galileo. His whole attention was
engrossed with the new truths which burst upon his understanding; and
after many fruitless attempts to check his ardour and direct his
thoughts to professional objects, his father was obliged to surrender
his parental control, and allow the fullest scope to the genius of his
son.

From the elementary works of geometry, Galileo passed to the writings of
Archimedes; and while he was studying the hydrostatical treatise[3] of
the Syracusan philosopher, he wrote his essay on the hydrostatical
balance[4], in which he describes the construction of the instrument,
and the method by which Archimedes detected the fraud committed by the
jeweller in the composition of Hiero's crown. This work gained for its
author the esteem of Guido Ubaldi, who had distinguished himself by his
mechanical and mathematical acquirements, and who engaged his young
friend to investigate the subject of the centre of gravity in solid
bodies. The treatise on this subject, which Galileo presented to his
patron, was the source of his future success.

Through the cardinal del Monte, the brother-in-law of Ubaldi, the
reigning duke of Tuscany, Ferdinand de' Medici, was made acquainted with
the merits of our young philosopher; and, in 1589, he was appointed
lecturer on mathematics at Pisa. By the drudgery of private teaching he
was obliged to add to the small salary of sixty crowns which was
attached to the office.

With this moderate Competency, Galileo commenced his philosophical
career. At the early age of eighteen, when he had entered the
university, he displayed his innate antipathy to the Aristotelian
philosophy. This feeling was strengthened by his earliest inquiries; and
upon his establishment at Pisa, he seems to have regarded the doctrines
of Aristotle as the intellectual prey which, in his chace of glory, he
was destined to pursue. Nizzoli, who flourished near the beginning of
the sixteenth century, and Giordano Bruno, who was burned at Rome in
1600, led the way in this daring pursuit; but it was reserved for
Galileo to track the Thracian boar through its native thickets, and, at
the risk of his own life, to strangle it in its den.

With the resolution of submitting every opinion to the test of
experiment, Galileo's first inquiries at Pisa were directed to the
mechanical doctrines of Aristotle. Their incorrectness and absurdity
soon became apparent; and with a zeal, perhaps, bordering on
indiscretion, he denounced them to his pupils with an ardour of manner
and of expression proportioned to his own conviction of the truth. The
detection of long-established errors is apt to inspire the young
philosopher with an exultation which reason condemns. The feeling of
triumph is apt to clothe itself in the language of asperity; and the
abettor, of erroneous opinions is treated as a species of enemy to
science. Like the soldier who fleshes his first spear in battle, the
philosopher is apt to leave the stain of cruelty upon his early
achievements. It is only from age and experience, indeed, that we can
expect the discretion of valour, whether it is called forth in
controversy or in battle. Galileo seems to have waged this stern warfare
against the followers of Aristotle; and such was the exasperation which
was excited by his reiterated and successful attacks, that he was
assailed, during the rest of his life, with a degree of rancour which
seldom originates in a mere difference of opinion. Forgetting that all
knowledge is progressive, and that the errors of one generation call
forth the comments, and are replaced by the discoveries, of the next,
Galileo did not anticipate that his own speculations and incompleted
labours might one day provoke unmitigated censure; and he therefore
failed in making allowance for the prejudices and ignorance of his
opponents. He who enjoys the proud lot of taking a position in advance
of his age, need not wonder that his less gifted contemporaries are left
behind. Men are not necessarily obstinate because they cleave to deeply
rooted and venerable errors, nor are they absolutely stupid when they
are long in understanding and embracing newly discovered truths.

It was one of the axioms of the Aristotelian mechanics, that the heavier
of two falling bodies would reach the ground sooner than the other, and
that their velocities would be proportional to their weights. Galileo
attacked the arguments by which this opinion was supported; and when he
found his reasoning ineffectual, he appealed to direct experiment. He
maintained, that all bodies would fall through the same height in the
same time, if they were not unequally retarded by the resistance of the
air: and though he performed the same experiment with the most
satisfactory results, by letting heavy bodies fall from the leaning
tower of Pisa; yet the Aristotelians, who with their own eyes saw the
unequal weights strike the ground at the same instant, ascribed the
effect to some unknown cause, and preferred the decision of their master
to that of nature herself.

Galileo could not brook this opposition to his discoveries; and the
Aristotelians could not tolerate the rebukes of their young instructor.
The two parties were, consequently, marshalled in hostile array; when,
fortunately for both, an event occurred, which placed them beyond the
reach of danger. Don Giovanni de' Medici, a natural son of Cosmo, had
proposed a method of clearing out the harbour of Leghorn. Galileo, whose
opinion was requested, gave such an unfavourable report upon it, that
the disappointed inventor directed against him all the force of his
malice. It was an easy task to concentrate the malignity of his enemies
at Pisa; and so effectually was this accomplished, that Galileo resolved
to accept another professorship, to which he had been previously
invited.

The chair of mathematics in the university of Padua having been vacant
for five years, the republic of Venice had resolved to fill it up; and,
on the recommendation of Guido Ubaldi, Galileo was appointed to it, in
1592, for a period of six years.

In 1591, Galileo lost his father, who died at an advanced age, and
devolved upon his eldest son the support of the family. This event,
probably, increased his anxiety to better his situation, and must have
added to his other inducements to quit Pisa. In September, 1592, he
removed to Padua, where he had a salary of only 180 florins, and where
he was obliged to add to his income by the labours of tuition.
Notwithstanding this fruitless occupation of his time, he appears to
have found leisure for composing several of his works, and completing
various inventions, which will be afterwards described. His manuscripts
were circulated privately among his friends and pupils; but some of them
strayed beyond this sacred limit, and found their way into the hands of
persons who did not scruple to claim and publish, as their own, the
discoveries and inventions which they contained.

It is not easy to ascertain the exact time when Galileo became a convert
to the doctrines of Copernicus, or the particular circumstances under
which he was led to adopt them. It is stated by Gerard Voss, that a
public lecture of Mæstlin, the instructor of Kepler, was the means of
making Galileo acquainted with the true system of the universe. This
assertion, however, is by no means probable; and it has been ably shown,
by the latest biographer of Galileo[5], that, in his dialogues on the
Copernican system, our author gives the true account of his own
conversion. This passage is so interesting, that we shall give it
entire.

"I cannot omit this opportunity of relating to you what happened to
myself at the time when this opinion (the Copernican system) began to be
discursed. I was then a very young man, and had scarcely finished my
course of philosophy, which other occupations obliged me to leave off,
when there arrived in this country, from Rostoch, a foreigner, whose
name, I believe, was Christian Vurstisius (Wurteisen), a follower of
Copernicus. This person delivered, on this subject, two or three
lectures in a certain academy, and to a crowded audience. Believing that
several were attracted more by the novelty of the subject than by any
other cause, and being firmly persuaded that this opinion was a piece of
solemn folly, I was unwilling to be present. Upon interrogating,
however, some of those who were there, I found that they all made it a
subject of merriment, with the exception of one, who assured me that it
was not a thing wholly ridiculous. As I considered this individual to be
both prudent and circumspect, I repented that I had not attended the
lectures; and, whenever I met any of the followers of Copernicus, I
began to inquire if they had always been of the same opinion. I found
that there was not one of them who did not declare that he had long
maintained the very opposite opinions, and had not gone over to the new
doctrines till he was driven by the force of argument. I next examined
them one by one, to see if they were masters of the arguments on the
opposite side; and such was the readiness of their answers, that I was
satisfied they had not taken up this opinion from ignorance or vanity.
On the other hand, whenever I interrogated the Peripatetics and the
Ptolemeans (and, out of curiosity, I have interrogated not a a few),
respecting their perusal of Copernicus's work, I perceived that there
were few who had seen the book, and not one who understood it. Nor have
I omitted to enquire among the followers of the Peripatetic doctrines,
if any of them had ever stood on the opposite side; and the result was,
that there was not one. Considering, then, that nobody followed the
Copernican doctrine, who had not previously held the contrary opinion,
and who was not well acquainted with the arguments of Aristotle and
Ptolemy; while, on the other hand, nobody followed Ptolemy and
Aristotle, who had before adhered to Copernicus, and had gone over from
him into the camp of Aristotle; weighing, I say, these things, I began
to believe that, if any one who rejects an opinion which he has imbibed
with his milk, and which has been embraced by an infinite number, shall
take up an opinion held only by a few, condemned by all the schools, and
really regarded as a great paradox, it cannot be doubted that he must
have been induced, not to say driven, to embrace it by the most cogent
arguments. On this account, I have become very curious to penetrate to
the very bottom of the subject."[6]

It appears, on the testimony of Galileo himself, that he taught the
Ptolemaic system, out of compliance with the popular feeling, after he
had convinced himself of the truth of the Copernican doctrines. In the
treatise on the sphere, indeed, which bears his name[7], and which must
have been written soon after he went to Padua, and subsequently to 1592,
the stability of the earth, and the motion of the sun, are supported by
the very arguments which Galileo afterwards ridiculed; but we have no
means of determining whether or not he had then adopted the true system
of the universe. Although he might have taught the Ptolemaic system in
his lectures, after he had convinced himself of its falsehood; yet it is
not likely that he would go so far as to publish to the worlds as true,
the very doctrines which he despised. In a letter to Kepler, dated in
1597, he distinctly states that he _had, many years ago, adopted the
opinions of Copernicus; but that he had not yet dared to publish his
arguments in favour of them, and his refutation of the opposite
opinions._ These facts would leave us to place Galileo's conversion
somewhere between 1593 and 1597; although _many_ years cannot be said to
have elapsed between these two dates.

At this early period of Galileo's life, in the year 1593, he met with an
accident; which had nearly proved fatal. A party at Padua; of which he
was one, were enjoying; at an open window; a current of air, which was
artificially cooled by a fall of water. Galileo unfortunately fell
asleep under its influence; and so powerful was its effect upon his
robust constitution; that he contracted a severe chronic disorder,
accompanied with acute pains in his body, and loss of sleep and
appetite, which attacked him at intervals during the rest of his life.
Others of the party suffered still more severely, and perished by their
own rashness.

Galileo's reputation was now widely extended over Europe; and the
archduke Ferdinand (afterwards emperor of Germany), the landgrave of
Hesse, and the princes of Alsace and Mantua honoured his lectures with
their presence. Prince Gustavus of Sweden also received instructions
from him in mathematics, during his sojourn in Italy; and it has been
supposed that this was the celebrated Gustavus Adolphus.

When Galileo had completed the first period of his engagement at Padua,
he was re-elected for other six years, with an increased salary of 320
florins. This liberal addition to his income is ascribed by Fabbroni to
the malice of one of his enemies, who informed the senate that Galileo
was living in illicit intercourse with Marina Gamba. Without inquiring
into the truth of the accusation, the senate is said to have replied,
that if "he had a family to support, he had the more need of an
increased salary." It is more likely that the liberality of the republic
had been called forth by the high reputation of their professor, and
that the terms of their reply were intended only to rebuke the malignity
of the informer. The mode of expression would seem to indicate that one
or more of Galileo's children had been born previous to his re-election
in 1598; but as this is scarcely consistent with other facts, we are
disposed to doubt the authenticity of Fabbroni's anecdote.

The new star, which attracted the notice of astronomers in 1604, excited
the particular attention of Galileo. The observations which he made upon
it, and the speculations which they suggested, formed the subject of
three lectures, the beginning of the first of which only has reached our
times. From the absence of parallax, he proved that the common
hypothesis of its being a meteor was erroneous, and that, like the fixed
stars, it was situated far beyond the bounds of our own system. The
popularity of the subject attracted crowds to his lecture-room; and
Galileo had the boldness to reproach his hearers for taking so deep an
interest in a temporary phenomenon, while they passed unnoticed the
wonders of creation which were daily presented to their view.

In the year 1606, Galileo was again appointed to the professorship at
Padua, with an augmented stipend of 520 florins. His popularity had now
risen so high, that his audience could not be accommodated in his
lecture-room; and even when he had assembled them in the school of
medicine, which contained 1000 persons, he was frequently obliged to
adjourn to the open air.

Among the variety of pursuits which occupied his attention, was the
examination of the properties of the loadstone. In 1607, he commenced
his experiments; but, with the exception of a method of arming
loadstones, which; according to the report of Sir Kenelm Digby, enabled
them to carry twice as much weight as others, he does not seem to have
made any additions to our knowledge of magnetism. He appears to have
studied with care the admirable work of our countryman; Dr. Gilbert; "De
Magnete," which was published in 1600; and he recognised; in the
experiments and reasonings of the English philosopher; the principles of
that method of investigating truth which he had himself adopted. Gilbert
died in 1603; in the 63d year of his age, and probably never read the
fine compliment which was paid to him by the Italian philosopher:--"I
extremely praise, admire, and envy this author."

In the preceding pages we have brought down the history of Galileo's
labours to that auspicious year in which he first directed the telescope
to the heavens. No sooner was that noble instrument placed in his hands,
than Providence released him from his professional toils, and supplied
him with the fullest leisure and the amplest means for pursuing and
completing the grandest discoveries.

Although he had quitted the service and the domains of his munificent
patron; the grand duke of Tuscany, yet he maintained his connection with
the family, by visiting Florence during his academic vacations, and
giving mathematical instruction to the younger branches of that
distinguished house. Cosmo, who had been one of his pupils, now
succeeded his father Ferdinand; and having his mind early imbued with a
love of knowledge, which had become hereditary in his family, he felt
that the residence of Galileo within his dominions--and still more his
introduction into his household--would do honour to their common
country, and reflect a lustre upon his own name. In the year 1609,
accordingly, Cosmo made proposals to Galileo to return to his original
situation at Pisa. These overtures were gratefully received; and in the
arrangements which Galileo on this occasion suggested, as well as in the
manner in which they were urged, we obtain some insight into his temper
and character. He informs the correspondent through whom Cosmo's offer
was conveyed, that his salary of 520 florins at Padua would be increased
to as many crowns at his re-election; and that he could enlarge his
income to any extent he pleased, by giving private lectures, and
receiving pupils. His public duties, he stated, occupied him only sixty
half-hours in the year; but his studies suffered such interruptions from
the domestic pupils and private lectures, that his most ardent wish was
to be relieved from them, in order that he might have sufficient rest
and leisure, before the close of his life, to finish and publish those
great works which he had in hand. In the event, therefore, of his
returning to Pisa, he hoped that it would be the first object of his
serene highness to give him leisure to complete his works without the
drudgery of lecturing. He expresses his anxiety to gain his bread by his
writings, and he promises to dedicate them to his serene master. He
enumerates, among these books, two on the system of the universe; three
on local motion; three books of mechanics; two on the demonstration of
principles, and one of problems; besides treatises on sound and speech,
on light and colours, on the tides, on the composition of continuous
quantity, on the motions of animals, and on the military art. On the
subject of his salary, he makes the following curious observations:--

"I say nothing," says he, "on the amount of my salary; being convinced
that, as I am to live upon it, the graciousness of his highness would
not deprive me of any of those comforts, of which, however, I feel the
want of less than many others; and, therefore, I say nothing more on the
subject. Finally, on the title and profession of my service, I should
wish that, to the title of mathematician, his highness would add that of
philosopher, as I profess to have studied a greater number of years in
philosophy, than months in pure mathematics; and how I have profited by
it, and if I can or ought to deserve this title, I may let their
highnesses see, as often as it shall please them to give me an
opportunity of discussing such subjects in their presence with those who
are most esteemed in this knowledge."

During the progress of this negotiation, Galileo went to Venice, on a
visit to a friend, in the month of April or May, 1609. Here he learned,
from common rumour, that a Dutchman, of the name of Jansen, had
presented to prince Maurice of Nassau an optical instrument, which
possessed the singular property of causing distant objects to appear
nearer and larger to the observer. A few days afterwards, the truth of
this report was confirmed by a letter which he received from James
Badovere at Paris, and he immediately applied himself to the
consideration of the subject. On the first night after his return to
Padua, he found, in the doctrines of refraction, the principle which he
sought. He placed at the ends of a leaden tube two spectacle glasses,
both of which were plain on one side, while one of them had its other
side convex, and the other its second side concave, and having applied
his eye to the concave glass, he saw objects pretty large and pretty
near him. This little instrument, which magnified only three times, he
carried in triumph to Venice, where it excited the most intense
interest. Crowds of the principal citizens flocked to his house to see
the magical toy; and after nearly a month had been spent in gratifying
this epidemical curiosity, Galileo was led to understand from Leonardo
Deodati, the doge of Venice, that the senate would be highly gratified
by obtaining possession of so extraordinary an instrument. Galileo
instantly complied with the wishes of his patrons, who acknowledged the
present by a mandate conferring upon him for life his professorship at
Padua, and generously raising his salary from 520 to 1000 florins.

Although we cannot doubt the veracity of Galileo, when he affirms that
he had never seen any of the Dutch telescopes, yet it is expressly
stated by Fuccarius, that one of these instruments had at this time been
brought to Florence. In a letter from Lorenzo Pignoria to Paolo Gualdo,
dated from Padua, on the 31st of August, 1609, it is expressly said,
that, at the re-election of the professors, Galileo had contrived to
obtain 1000 florins for life, which was alleged to be on account of an
eye-glass like the one which was sent from Flanders to the Cardinal
Borghese.

In a memoir so brief and general as the present, it would be out of
place to discuss the history of this extraordinary invention. We have no
hesitation in asserting that a method of magnifying distant objects was
known to Baptista Porta and others; but it seems to be equally certain
that an _instrument_ for producing these effects was first constructed
in Holland, and that it was from that kingdom that Galileo derived the
knowledge of its existence. In considering the contending claims, which
have been urged with all the ardour and partiality of national feeling,
it has been generally overlooked, _that a single convex lens_, whose
focal length exceeds the distance at which we examine minute objects,
performs the part of a telescope, when an eye, placed behind it, sees
distinctly the inverted image which it forms. A lens, twenty feet in
focal length, will in this manner magnify twenty times; and it was by
the same principle that Sir William Herschel discovered a new satellite
of Saturn, by using only the mirror of his forty-feet telescope. The
instrument presented to prince Maurice, and which the marquis Spinola
found in the Dutch optician's shop, performing the part of a
philosophical toy, by exhibiting a magnified and inverted image of a
distant weathercock, must have been a single lens such as we have
mentioned, or an astronomical telescope consisting of two convex lenses.
Upon either of these suppositions, it differed entirely from that which
Galileo constructed; and the Italian philosopher will be justly entitled
to the honour of having invented that form of the telescope which still
bears his name.

The interest which the exhibition of the telescope excited at Venice did
not soon subside: Serturi describes it as amounting almost to phrensy.
When he himself had succeeded in making one of these instruments, he
ascended the tower of St. Mark, where he might use it without
molestation. He was recognised, however, by a crowd in the street; and
such was the eagerness of their curiosity, that they took possession of
the wondrous tube, and detained the impatient philosopher for several
hours, till they had successively witnessed its effects. Desirous of
obtaining the same gratification for their friends, they endeavoured to
learn the name of the inn at which he lodged; but Serturi fortunately
overheard their inquiries, and quitted Venice early next morning, in
order to avoid a second visitation of this new school of philosophers.
The opticians speedily availed themselves of this new instrument.
Galileo's tube,--or the double eye-glass, as it was then called, for
Demisiano had not yet given it the appellation of a _telescope_,--was
manufactured in great quantities, and in a very superior manner. The
instruments were purchased merely as philosophical toys, and were
carried by travellers into every corner of Europe.

The art of grinding and polishing lenses was at this time very
imperfect. Galileo, and those whom he instructed, were alone capable of
making tolerable instruments. It appears, from the testimony of Gassendi
and Gærtner, that, in 1634, a good telescope could not be procured in
Paris, Venice, or Amsterdam; and that, even in 1637, there was not one
in Holland which could show Jupiter's disc well defined.

After Galileo had completed his first instrument, which magnified only
_three_ times, he executed a larger and more accurate one, with a power
of about eight. "At length," as he himself remarks, "sparing neither
labour nor expense," he constructed an instrument so excellent, that it
magnified more than thirty times.

The first celestial object to which Galileo applied his telescope was
the moon, which, to use his own words, appeared as near as if it had
been distant only two semidiameters of the earth. He then directed it to
the planets and the fixed stars, which he frequently observed with
"incredible satisfaction."[8]

The observations which he made upon the moon possessed a high degree of
interest. The general resemblance of its surface to that of our own
globe naturally fixed his attention; and he was soon able to trace, in
almost every part of the lunar disc, ranges of mountains, deep hollows,
and other inequalities, which reflected from their summits the rays of
the rising sun, while the intervening hollows were still buried in
darkness. The dark and luminous spaces he regarded as indicating seas
and continents, which reflected, in different degrees, the incident
light of the sun; and he ascribed the phosphorescence, as it has been
improperly called, or the secondary light, which is seen on the dark
limb of the moon in her first and last quarters, to the reflection of
the sun's light from the earth.

These discoveries were ill received by the followers of Aristotle.
According to their preconceived opinions, the moon was perfectly
spherical, and perfectly smooth; to cover it with mountains, and to
scoop it out into valleys, was an act of impiety which defaced the
regular forms which nature herself had imprinted. It was in vain that
Galileo appealed to the evidence of observation, and to the actual
surface of our own globe. The very irregularities on the moon were, in
his opinion, the proof of divine wisdom: and had its surface been
perfectly smooth, it would have been "but a vast unblessed desert, void
of animals, of plants, of cities, and of men; the abode of silence and
inaction; senseless, lifeless, soulless, and stripped of all those
ornaments which now render it so various and so beautiful."

In examining the fixed stars, and comparing them with the planets,
Galileo discovered a remarkable difference in the appearance of their
discs. All the planets appeared with round globular discs like the moon;
whereas the fixed stars never exhibited any disc at all, but resembled
lucid points sending forth twinkling rays. Stars of all magnitudes he
found to have the same appearance; those of the fifth and sixth
magnitude having the same character when seen through a telescope, as
Sirius, the largest of the stars, when seen by the naked eye. Upon
directing his telescope to nebulæ and clusters of stars, he was
delighted to find that they consisted of great numbers of stars which
could not be recognised by unassisted vision. He counted no fewer than
_forty_ in the cluster called the _Pleiades_, or _Seven Stars_; and he
has given us drawings of this constellation, as well as of the belt and
sword of Orion, and of the nebula of Præsepe. In the great nebula of
the Milky Way, he descried crowds of minute stars; and he concluded that
this singular portion derived its whiteness from still smaller stars,
which his telescope was unable to separate.

Important and interesting as these discoveries were, they were thrown
into the shade by those to which he was led during an accurate
examination of the planets with a more powerful telescope. On the 7th of
January, 1610, at one o'clock in the morning, when he directed this
telescope to Jupiter, he observed three stars near the body of the
planet; two being to the east and one to the west of him. They were all
in a straight line, and parallel to the ecliptic, and appeared brighter
than other stars of the same magnitude. Believing them to be fixed
stars, he paid no great attention to their distances from Jupiter and
from one another. On the 8th of January, however, when, from some cause
or other[9], he had been led to observe the stars again, he found a very
different arrangement of them: all the three were on the west side of
Jupiter, _nearer one another than before_, and almost at equal
distances. Though he had not turned his attention to the extraordinary
fact of the mutual approach of the stars, yet he began to consider how
Jupiter could be found to the east of the three stars, when only the day
before he had been to the west of two of them. The only explanation
which he could give of this fact was, that the motion of Jupiter was
_direct_ contrary to astronomical calculations; and that he had got
before these two stars by his own motion.

In this dilemma between the testimony of his senses and the results of
calculation, he waited for the following night with the utmost anxiety:
but his hopes were disappointed; for the heavens were wholly veiled in
clouds. On the tenth, two only of the stars appeared, and both on the
east of the planet. As it was obviously impossible that Jupiter could
have advanced from west to east on the 8th of January, and from east to
west on the 10th, Galileo was forced to conclude that the phenomenon
which he had observed, arose from the motion of the stars, and he set
himself to observe diligently their change of place. On the 11th, there
were still only two stars; and both to the east of Jupiter; but the more
eastern star was now _twice as large as the other one_, though on the
preceding night they had been perfectly equal. This fact threw a new
light upon Galileo's difficulties, and he immediately drew the
conclusion, which he considered to be indubitable--"that there were in
the heavens three stars which revolved round Jupiter, in the same manner
as Venus and Mercury revolve round the sun." On the 12th of January, he
again observed them in new positions, and of different magnitudes; and,
on the 13th, he discovered a fourth star, which completed the four
secondary planets with which Jupiter is surrounded.

Galileo continued his observations on these bodies every clear night
till the 22d of March, and studied their motions in reference to fixed
stars that were at the same time within the field of his telescope.
Having thus clearly established that the four new stars were satellites
or moons, which revolved round Jupiter in the same manner as the moon
revolves round our own globe, he drew up an account of his discovery, in
which he gave to the four new bodies the names of the _Medicean Stars_,
in honour of his patron, Cosmo de' Medici, grand duke of Tuscany. This
work, under the title of "Nuncius Sidereus," or the "Sidereal
Messenger," was dedicated to the same prince; and the dedication bears
the date of the 4th of March, only two days after he concluded his
observations.

The importance of this great discovery was instantly felt by the enemies
as well as by the friends of the Copernican system. The planets had
hitherto been distinguished from the fixed stars only by their relative
change of place; but the telescope proved them to be bodies so near to
our own globe as to exhibit well-defined discs; while the fixed stars
retained, even when magnified, the minuteness of remote and lucid
points. The system of Jupiter, illuminated by four moons performing
their revolutions in different and regular periods, exhibited to our
proud reason the comparative insignificance of the globe we inhabit, and
proclaimed in impressive language that globe was not the centre of
the universe.

The reception which these discoveries met with from Kepler is highly
interesting, and characteristic of the genius of that great man. He was
one day sitting idle, and thinking of Galileo, when his friend
Wachenfels stopped his carriage at his door, to communicate to him the
intelligence. "Such a fit of wonder," says he, "seized me at a report
which seemed to be so very absurd, and I was thrown into such agitation
at seeing an old dispute between us decided in this way, that between
his joy, my colouring, and the laughter of both, confounded as we were
by such a novelty, we were hardly capable, he of speaking, or I of
listening. On our parting, I immediately began to think how there could
be any addition to the number of the planets, without overturning my
'Cosmographic Mystery,' according to which Euclid's five regular solids
do not allow more than six planets round the sun. * * * I am so far from
disbelieving the existence of the four circumjovial planets, that I long
for a telescope, to anticipate you, if possible, in discovering _two_
round Mars, as the proportion seems to require, _six_ or _eight_ round
Saturn, and perhaps one each round Mercury and Venus."

In a very different spirit did the Aristotelians receive the "Sidereal
Messenger" of Galileo. The principal professor of philosophy at Padua
resisted Galileo's repeated and urgent entreaties to look at the moon
and planets through his telescope; and he even laboured to convince the
grand duke that the satellites of Jupiter could not possibly exist.
Sizzi, an astronomer of Florence, maintained, that as there were only
_seven_ apertures in the head--_two_ eyes, _two_ ears, _two_ nostrils,
and _one_ mouth--and as there were only _seven_ metals, and _seven_ days
in the week, so there could be only _seven_ planets. He seems, however,
to have admitted the visibility of the four satellites through the
telescope; but he argues, that as they are invisible to the naked eye,
they can exercise no influence on the earth; and being useless, they do
not therefore exist.

A _protégé_ of Kepler's, of the name of Horky, wrote a volume against
Galileo's discovery, after having declared, "that he would never concede
his four new planets to that Italian from Padua, even if he should die
for it." This resolute Aristotelian was at no loss for arguments. He
asserted that he had examined the heavens _through Galileo's own glass_,
and that no such thing as a satellite existed round Jupiter. He
affirmed, that he did not more surely know that he had a soul in his
body, than that reflected rays are the sole cause of Galileo's erroneous
observations; and that the only use of the new planets was to gratify
Galileo's thirst for gold, and afford himself a subject of discussion.

When Horky first presented himself to Kepler, after the publication of
this work, the opinion of his patron was announced to him by a burst of
indignation which overwhelmed the astonished author. Horky supplicated
mercy for his offence; and, as Kepler himself informed Galileo, he took
him again into favour, on the condition that Kepler was to show him
Jupiter's satellites; and that Horky was not only to see them, but to
admit their existence.

When the spirit of philosophy had thus left the individuals who bore her
sacred name, it was fortunate for science that it found a refuge in the
minds of princes. Notwithstanding the reiterated logic of his
philosophical professor at Padua, Cosmo de' Medici preferred the
testimony of his senses to the syllogisms of his instructor. He observed
the new planets several times, along with Galileo, at Pisa; and when he
parted with him, he gave him a present worth more than 1000 florins, and
concluded that liberal arrangement to which we have already referred.

As philosopher and principal mathematician to the grand duke of Tuscany,
Galileo now took up his residence at Florence, with a salary of 1000
florins. No official duties, excepting that of lecturing occasionally to
sovereign princes, were attached to this appointment; and it was
expressly stipulated that he should enjoy the most perfect leisure to
complete his treatises on the constitution of the universe, on
mechanics, and on local motion. The resignation of his professorship at
Padua, which necessarily followed his new appointment, created much
dissatisfaction in that university: but though many of his former
friends refused at first to hold any communication with him, this
feeling gradually subsided; and the Venetian senate at last appreciated
the views, as well as the powerful motives, which induced a stranger to
accept of promotion in his native land.

While Galileo was enjoying the reward and the fame of his great
discovery, a new species of enmity was roused against them. Simon Mayer,
an astronomer of no character, pretended that he had discovered the
satellites of Jupiter before Galileo, and that his first observation was
made on the 29th of December, 1609. Other astronomers announced the
discovery of new satellites: Scheiner reckoned five, Rheita nine, and
others found even so many as twelve: these satellites, however, were
found to be only fixed stars. The names of _Vladislavian, Agrippine,
Uranodavian_, and _Ferdinandotertian_, which were hastily given to these
common telescopic stars, soon disappeared from the page of science, and
even the splendid telescopes of modern times have not been able to add
another gem to the diadem of Jupiter.

A modern astronomer of no mean celebrity has, even in the present day,
endeavoured to rob Galileo of this staple article of his reputation.
From a careless examination of the papers of our celebrated countryman,
Thomas Harriot, which baron Zach had made in 1784, at Petworth, the seat
of lord Egremont, this astronomer has asserted[10] that Harriot first
observed the satellites of Jupiter on the 16th of January, 1610; and
continued his observations till the 25th of February, 1612. Baron Zach
adds the following extraordinary conclusion:--"Galileo pretends to have
discovered them on the 7th of January, 1610; so that it is not
improbable that Harriot was likewise the first discoverer of these
attendants of Jupiter." In a communication which I received from Dr.
Robertson, of Oxford, in 1822[11], he informed me that he had examined a
class of Harriot's papers, entitled, "De Jovialibus Planetis;" and that
it appears, from two pages of these papers, _that Harriot first observed
Jupiter's satellites on the 17th of October_, 1610. These observations
are accompanied with rough drawings of the positions of the satellites,
and rough calculations of their periodical revolutions. My friend,
professor Rigaud[12], who has very recently examined the Harriot MSS.,
has confirmed the accuracy of Dr. Robertson's observations, and has thus
restored to Galileo the honour of being the first and the sole
discoverer of these secondary planets.

The great success which attended the first telescopic observations of
Galileo, induced him to apply his best instruments to the other planets
of our system. The attempts which had been made to deprive him of the
honour of some of his discoveries, combined, probably, with a desire to
repeat his observations with better telescopes, led him to announce his
discoveries under the veil of an enigma; and to invite astronomers to
declare, within a given time, if they had observed any new phenomena in
the heavens.

Before the close of 1610, Galileo excited the curiosity of astronomers,
by the publication of his first enigma. Kepler and others tried in vain
to decipher it; but in consequence of the emperor Rodolph requesting a
solution of the puzzle, Galileo sent him the following clue:--


"Altissimam planetam tergeminam observavi."

I have observed that the most remote planet is triple.


In explaining more fully the nature of his observation, Galileo remarked
that Saturn was not a single star, but three together, nearly touching
one another: he described them as having no relative motion, and as
having the form of three o's, namely, oOo, the central one being larger
than those on each side of it.

Although Galileo had announced that nothing new appeared in the other
planets, yet he soon communicated to the world another discovery of no
slight interest. The enigmatical letters in which it was concealed,
formed the following sentence:--


"Cynthia figuras æmulatur mater Amorum."

Venus rivals the phases of the moon.


Hitherto, Galileo had observed Venus when her disc was largely
illuminated; but having directed his telescope to her when she was not
far removed from the sun, he saw her in the form of a crescent,
resembling exactly the moon at the same elongation from the sun. He
continued to observe her night after night, during the whole time that
she could be seen in the course of her revolution round the sun, and he
found that she exhibited the very same phases which resulted from her
motion round that luminary.

Galileo had long contemplated a visit to the metropolis of Italy, and he
accordingly carried his intentions into effect in the early part of the
year 1611. Here he was received with that distinction which was due to
his great talents and his extended reputation. Princes, cardinals, and
prelates hastened to do him honour; and even those who discredited his
discoveries, and dreaded their results, vied with the true friends of
science in their anxiety to see the first wonder of the age.

In order to show the new celestial phenomena to his friends at Rome,
Galileo took with him his best telescope; and as he had discovered the
spots on the sun's surface in the month of March, 1611, he had the
gratification of exhibiting this new wonder to his admiring disciples.
He accordingly erected his telescope in the Quirinal garden, belonging
to cardinal Bandini; and in April, 1611, he exhibited them to his
friends in many of their most interesting variations. From their change
of position on the sun's disc, Galileo at first inferred, either that
the sun revolved about an axis; or that other planets, like Venus and
Mercury, revolved so near the sun as to appear like black spots when
they were opposite to his disc. Upon continuing his observations,
however, he saw reason to abandon this last opinion. He found, that the
spots must be in contact with the surface of the sun; that their figures
were irregular; that they had different degrees of darkness; that one
spot would often divide itself into three or four; that three or four
spots would often unite themselves into one; and that all the spots
revolved regularly with the sun, which appeared to complete its
revolution in about twenty-eight days.

Previous to the invention of the telescope, spots had been more than
once seen on the sun's disc with the unassisted eye. But even if these
were of the same character as those which Galileo and others observed,
we cannot consider them as anticipations of their discovery by the
telescope. As the telescope was now in the possession of several
astronomers, Galileo began to have many rivals in discovery; and it is
now placed beyond the reach of doubt, that he was not the first
discoverer of the solar spots. From the communication which I received
from the late Dr. Robertson, of Oxford[13], it appears that Thomas
Harriot had discovered the solar spots on or before the 8th of December,
1610. His manuscripts, in lord Egremont's possession, incontestably
prove that his regular observations on the spots commenced on the 8th of
December, 1610,--at least three months before Galileo discovered them;
and that they were continued till the 18th of January, 1613. The
observations which he has recorded are 199 in number; and the accounts
of them are accompanied with rough drawings representing the number,
position, and magnitude of the spots.[14]

Another candidate for the honour of discovering the spots of the sun,
was John Fabricius, who undoubtedly saw them previous to June, 1611. The
dedication of the work[15] in which he has recorded his observation,
bears the date of the 13th of June, 1611; and it is obvious, from the
work itself, that he had seen the spots during the year 1610: but as
there is no proof that he saw them before the 8th of December, 1610, and
as it is probable that Harriot had seen them before that date, we are
compelled to assign the priority of the discovery to our distinguished
countryman.

The claim of Scheiner, professor of mathematics at Ingolstadt, is more
intimately connected with the history of Galileo. This learned
astronomer having, early in 1611, turned his telescope to the sun,
necessarily discovered the spots which at that time covered his disc.
Light flying clouds happened, at the time, to weaken the intensity of
his light, so that he was able to show the spots to his pupils. These
observations were not published till January, 1612; and they appeared in
the form of three letters, addressed to Mark Velser, one of the
magistrates of Augsburg, under the signature of _Apelles post Tabulam_.
Scheiner, who, many years afterwards, published an elaborate work on the
subject, adopted the same idea which had at first occurred to
Galileo,--that the spots were the dark sides of planets revolving round
and near the sun.[16]

On the publication of Scheiner's letters Velser transmitted a copy of
them to his friend Galileo, with the request that he would favour him
with his opinion of the new phenomena. After some delay, Galileo
addressed three letters to Velser, in which he combated the opinions of
Scheiner on the cause of the spots. These letters were dated the 4th of
May, 1612; but though the controversy was carried on in the language of
mutual respect and esteem, it put an end to the friendship which had
existed between the two astronomers. In these letters, Galileo showed
that the spots often dispersed like vapours or clouds; that they
sometimes had a duration of only one or two days, and at other times of
thirty or forty days; that they contracted in their breadth when they
approached the sun's limb, without any diminution of their length; that
they describe circles parallel to each other; that the monthly rotation
of the sun again brings the same spots into view; and that they are
seldom seen at a greater distance than 30° from the sun's equator.
Galileo, likewise, discovered on the sun's disc _faculœ_, or _luculi_,
as they were called, which differ in no respect from the common ones but
in their being brighter than the rest of the sun's surface.[17]

In the last of the letters which our author addressed to Velser, and
which was written in December, 1612, he recurs to his former discovery
of the elongated shape, or rather the triple structure, of Saturn. The
singular figure which he had observed in this planet had entirely
disappeared; and he evidently announces the fact to Velser, lest it
should be used by his enemies to discredit the accuracy of his
observations. "Looking on Saturn," says he, "within these few days, I
found it solitary, without the assistance of its accustomed stars, and,
in short, perfectly round and defined like Jupiter; and such it still
remains. Now, what can be said of so strange a metamorphosis? Are the
two smaller stars consumed like the spots on the sun? Have they suddenly
vanished and fled? or has Saturn devoured his own children? or was the
appearance indeed fraud and illusion, with which the glasses have for so
long a time mocked me, and so many others who have often observed with
me? Now, perhaps, the time is come to revive the withering hopes of
those who, guided by more profound contemplations, have followed all the
fallacies of the new observations, and recognised their impossibilities.
I cannot resolve what to say in a chance so strange, so new, and so
unexpected; the shortness of the time, the unexampled occurrence, the
weakness of my intellect, and the terror of being mistaken, have greatly
confounded me." Although Galileo struggled to obtain a solution of this
mystery, yet he had not the good fortune of succeeding. He imagined that
the two smaller stars would reappear, in consequence of the supposed
revolution of the planet round its axis; but the discovery of the ring
of Saturn, and of the obliquity of its plane to the ecliptic, was
necessary to explain the phenomena which were so perplexing to our
author.

The ill health to which Galileo was occasionally subject, and the belief
that the air of Florence was prejudicial to his complaints, induced him
to spend much of his time at Selve, the villa of his friend Salviati.
This eminent individual had ever been the warmest friend of Galileo, and
seems to have delighted in drawing round him the scientific genius of
the age. He was a member of the celebrated Lyncæan Society, founded by
Prince Frederigo Cesi; and though he is not known as the author of any
important discovery, yet he has earned, by his liberality to science, a
glorious name, which will be indissolubly united with the immortal
destiny of Galileo.

The subject of floating bridges having been discussed at one of the
scientific parties which had assembled at the house of Salviati, a
difference of opinion arose respecting the influence of the shape of
bodies on their disposition to float or to sink in a fluid. Contrary to
the general opinion, Galileo undertook to prove that it depended on
other causes: and he was thus led to compose his discourse on floating
bodies[18], which was published in 1612, and dedicated to Cosmo de'
Medici. This work contains many ingenious experiments, and much acute
reasoning in support of the true principles of hydrostatics; and it is
now chiefly remarkable as a specimen of the sagacity and intellectual
power of its author. Like all his other works, it encountered the most
violent opposition; and Galileo was more than once summoned into the
field to repel the aggressions of his ignorant and presumptuous
opponents. The first attack upon it was made by Ptolemy Nozzolini, in a
letter to Marzemedici, archbishop of Florence[19]; and to this Galileo
replied in a letter addressed to his antagonist.[20] A more elaborate
examination of it was published by Lodovico delle Colombe, and another
by M. Vincenzo di Grazia. To these attacks, a minute and overwhelming
answer was printed in the name of Benedetti Castelli, the friend and
pupil of Galileo; but it was discovered, some years after Galileo's
death, that he was himself the author of this work.[21]

The current of Galileo's life had hitherto flowed in a smooth and
unobstructed channel. He had now attained the highest objects of earthly
ambition. His discoveries had placed him at the head of the great men of
his age; he possessed a professional income far beyond his wants, and
even beyond his anticipations; and, what is still dearer to a
philosopher, he enjoyed the most perfect leisure for carrying on and
completing his discoveries. The opposition which these discoveries
encountered, was to him more a subject for triumph than for sorrow.
Prejudice and ignorance were his only enemies; and if they succeeded for
a while in harassing his march, it was only to give him occasion for
fresh achievements. He who contends for truths which he has himself been
permitted to discover, may well sustain the conflict in which
presumption and error are destined to fall. The public tribunal may
neither be sufficiently pure nor enlightened to decide upon the issue;
but he can appeal to posterity, and reckon with confidence on "its sure
decree."

The ardour of Galileo's mind, the keenness of his temper, his clear
perception of truth, and his inextinguishable love of it, combined to
exasperate and prolong the hostility of his enemies. When argument
failed to enlighten their judgment, and reason to remove their
prejudices, he wielded against them his powerful weapons of ridicule and
sarcasm; and in this unrelenting warfare, he seems to have forgotten
that Providence had withheld from his enemies those very gifts which he
had so liberally received. He who is allowed to take the start of his
species, and to penetrate the veil which conceals from common minds the
mysteries of nature, must not expect that the world will be patiently
dragged at the chariot wheels of his philosophy. Mind has its inertia,
as well as matter; and its progress to truth can only be insured by the
gradual and patient removal of the obstructions which surround it.

The boldness--may we not say the recklessness?--with which Galileo
insisted upon making proselytes of his enemies, produced the very
opposite effect. Errors thus assailed, entrenched themselves in general
feelings, and were embalmed in the virulence of the passions. The
various classes of his opponents marshalled themselves for their mutual
defence. The Aristotelian professors, the temporising Jesuits, the
political churchmen, and that timid but respectable body who at all
times dread innovation, whether it be in religion or in science, entered
into an alliance against the philosophical tyrant who threatened them
with the penalties of knowledge.

The party of Galileo, though weak in numbers, was not without power and
influence. He had trained around him a devoted band, who idolised his
genius and supported his views. His pupils had been appointed to several
of the principal professorships in Italy. The enemies of religion were
on this occasion united with the Christian philosopher; and there were,
even in these days, many princes and nobles who had felt the
inconvenience of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and who secretly abetted
Galileo in his crusade against established errors.

Although these two parties had been long dreading each other's power,
and reconnoitring each other's position, yet we cannot exactly determine
which of them hoisted the first signal for war. The church party,
particularly its high dignitaries, were certainly disposed to rest on
the defensive. Flanked on one side by the logic of the schools, and on
the other by the popular interpretation of Scripture, and backed by the
strong arm of the civil power, they were not disposed to interfere with
the prosecution of science, however much they may have dreaded its
influence. The philosophers, on the contrary, united the zeal of
innovators with the firmness of purpose which truth alone can inspire.
Victorious in every contest, they were flushed with success, and they
panted for a struggle in which they knew they must triumph.

In this state of warlike preparation Galileo addressed a letter, in
1613, to his friend and pupil, the abbé Castelli, the object of which
was to prove that the Scriptures were not intended to teach us science
and philosophy. Hence he inferred, that the language employed in the
sacred volume in reference to such subjects should be interpreted only
in its common acceptation; and that it was in reality as difficult to
reconcile the Ptolemaic as the Copernican system to the expressions
which occur in the Bible.

A demonstration was about this time made by the opposite party, in the
person of Caccini, a Dominican friar, who made a personal attack upon
Galileo from the pulpit. This violent ecclesiastic ridiculed the
astronomer and his followers, by addressing them in the sacred language
of Scripture; "Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye here looking up into
heaven?" But this species of warfare was disapproved of even by the
church; and Luigi Maraffi, the general of the Dominicans, not only
apologised to Galileo, who had transmitted to him a formal complaint
against Caccini, but expressed the acuteness of his own feelings on
being implicated in the "brutal conduct of thirty or forty thousand
monks."

From the character of Caccini, and the part which he afterwards played
in the persecution of Galileo, we can scarcely avoid the opinion that
his attack from the pulpit was intended as a snare for the unwary
philosopher. It roused Galileo from his wonted caution; and stimulated,
no doubt, by the nature of the answer which he received from Maraffi, he
published a longer letter of seventy pages, defending and illustrating
his former views respecting the influence of scriptural language on the
two contending systems. As if to give the impress of royal authority to
this new appeal, he addressed it to Christian, grand-duchess of Tuscany,
the mother of Cosmo; and in this form it seems to have excited a new
interest, as if it had expressed the opinion of the grand-ducal family.
These external circumstances gave additional weight to the powerful and
unanswerable reasoning which this letter contains; and it was scarcely
possible that any man, possessed of a sound mind, and willing to learn
the truth, should refuse his assent to the judicious views of our
author. He expresses his belief that the Scriptures were given to
instruct mankind respecting their salvation, and that the faculties of
our minds were given us for the purpose of investigating the phenomena
of nature. He considers Scripture and nature as proceeding from the same
divine author, and, therefore, incapable of speaking a different
language; and he points out the absurdity of supposing that professors
of astronomy will shut their eyes to the phenomena which they discover
in the heavens, or will refuse to believe those deductions of reason
which appeal to their judgment with all the power of demonstration. He
supports these views by quotations from the ancient fathers; and he
refers to the dedication of Copernicus's own work to the Roman pontiff,
Paul III., as a proof that the pope himself did not regard the new
system of the world as hostile to the sacred writings. Copernicus, on
the contrary, tells his holiness, that the reason of inscribing to him
his new system was, that the authority of the pontiff might put to
silence the calumnies of some individuals, who attacked it by arguments
drawn from passages of Scripture twisted for their own purpose.

It was in vain to meet such arguments by any other weapons than those of
the civil power. His enemies saw that they must either crush the
dangerous innovation, or allow it the fullest scope; and they determined
upon an appeal to the inquisition. Lorini, a monk of the Dominican
order, had already denounced to this body Galileo's letter to Castelli;
and Caccini, bribed by the mastership of the convent of St. Mary of
Minerva, was invited to settle at Rome for the purpose of embodying the
evidence against Galileo.

Though these plans had been carried on in secret, yet Galileo's
suspicions were excited; and he obtained leave from Cosmo to go to Rome
about the end of 1615.[22] Here he was lodged in the palace of the grand
duke's ambassador, and kept up a constant correspondence with the family
of his patron at Florence; but, in the midst of this external splendour,
he was summoned before the inquisition to answer for the heretical
doctrines which he had published. He was charged with maintaining the
motion of the earth, and the stability of the sun, with teaching this
doctrine to his pupils, with corresponding on the subject with several
German mathematicians, and with having published it, and attempted to
reconcile it to Scripture, in his letters to Mark Velser in 1612. The
inquisition assembled to consider these charges on the 25th of February,
1615; and it was decreed that Galileo should be enjoined by cardinal
Bellarmine to renounce the obnoxious doctrines, and to pledge himself
that he would neither teach, defend, nor publish them in future. In the
event of his refusing to acquiesce in this sentence, it was decreed that
he should be thrown into prison. Galileo did not hesitate to yield to
this injunction. On the day following, the 26th of February, he appeared
before cardinal Bellarmine, to renounce his heretical opinions; and,
having declared that he abandoned the doctrine of the earth's motion,
and would neither defend nor teach it, in his conversation or in his
writings, he was dismissed the court.

Having thus disposed of Galileo, the inquisition conceived the design of
condemning the whole system of Copernicus as heretical. Galileo, with
more hardihood than prudence, remained at Rome for the purpose of giving
his assistance in frustrating this plan; but there is reason to think
that he injured by his presence the very cause which he meant to
support. The inquisition had determined to put down the new opinions;
and they now inserted among the prohibited books Galileo's letters to
Castelli and the grand duchess, Kepler's epitome of the Copernican
theory, and Copernicus's own work on the revolutions of the heavenly
bodies.

Notwithstanding these proceedings, Galileo had an audience of the pope,
Paul V., in March, 1616. He was received very graciously, and spent
nearly an hour with his holiness. When they were about to part, the pope
assured Galileo, that the congregation were not disposed to receive upon
light grounds any calumnies which might be propagated by his enemies,
and that, as long as he occupied the papal chair, he might consider
himself as safe.

These assurances were no doubt founded on the belief that Galileo would
adhere to his pledges; but so bold and inconsiderate was he in the
expression of his opinions, that even in Rome he was continually engaged
in controversial discussions. The following very interesting account of
these disputes is given by Querenghi, in a letter to the cardinal
D'Este:--

"Your eminence would be delighted with Galileo if you heard him holding
forth, as he often does, in the midst of fifteen or twenty, all
violently attacking him, sometimes in one house, sometimes in another.
But he is armed after such fashion that he laughs all of them to
scorn,--and even if the novelty of his opinions prevents entire
persuasion, at least he convicts of emptiness most of the arguments with
which his adversaries endeavour to overwhelm him. He was particularly
admirable on Monday last in the house of signor Frederico Ghisilieri;
and what especially pleased me was, that before replying to the contrary
arguments, he amplified and enforced them with new grounds of great
plausibility, so as to leave his adversaries in a more ridiculous
plight, when he afterwards overturned them all."

The discovery of Jupiter's satellites suggested to Galileo a new method
of finding the longitude at sea. Philip III. had encouraged astronomers
to direct their attention to this problem, by offering a reward for its
solution; and in those days, when new discoveries in science were
sometimes rejected as injurious to mankind, it was no common event to
see a powerful sovereign courting the assistance of astronomers in
promoting the commercial interests of his empire. Galileo seems to have
regarded the solution of this problem as an object worthy of his
ambition; and he no doubt anticipated the triumph which he would obtain
over his enemies, if the Medicean stars, which they had treated with
such contempt, could be made subservient to the great interests of
mankind. During his residence at Rome in 1615 and 1616, Galileo had
communicated his views on this subject to the comte di Lemos, the
viceroy of Naples, who had presided over the council of the Spanish
Indies. This nobleman advised him to apply to the Spanish minister, the
duke of Lerma; and, through the influence of the grand duke Cosmo, his
ambassador at the court of Madrid was engaged to manage the affair. The
anxiety of Galileo on this subject was singularly great. He assured the
Tuscan ambassador that, in order to accomplish this object, "he was
ready to leave all his comforts, his country, his friends, and his
family, to cross over into Spain, and to stay as long as he might be
wanted at Seville or at Lisbon, or wherever it might be convenient to
communicate a knowledge of his method." The enthusiasm of Galileo seems
to have increased the lethargy of the Spanish court; and though the
negotiations were occasionally revived for ten or twelve years, yet no
steps were taken to bring them to a close. This strange procrastination
has been generally ascribed to jealousy or indifference on the part of
Spain; but Nelli, one of Galileo's biographers, declares, on the
authority of Florentine records, that Cosmo had privately requested from
the government the privilege of sending annually t to the Spanish Indies
two Leghorn merchantmen free of duty, as a compensation for the loss of
Galileo!

The failure of this negotiation must have been a source of extreme
mortification to the high spirit and sanguine temperament of Galileo. He
had calculated, however, too securely on his means of putting the new
method to a successful trial. The great imperfection of the time-keepers
of that day, and the want of proper telescopes, would have baffled him
in all his efforts, and he would have been subject to a more serious
mortification from the failure and rejection of his plan, than that
which he actually experienced from the avarice of his patron, or the
indifference of Spain. Even in the present day, no telescope has been
invented which is capable of observing at sea the eclipses of Jupiter's
satellites; and though this method of finding the longitude has great
advantages on shore, yet it has been completely abandoned at sea, and
superseded by easier and more correct methods.

In the year 1618, when no fewer than three comets visited our system,
and attracted the attention of all the astronomers of Europe, Galileo
was unfortunately confined to his bed by a severe illness; but, though
he was unable to make a single observation upon these remarkable bodies,
he contrived to involve himself in the controversies which they
occasioned. Marco Guiducci, an astronomer of Florence, and a friend of
Galileo's, had delivered a discourse on comets before the Florentine
Academy, which was published in 1619.[23] The heads of this discourse
were supposed to have been communicated to him by Galileo, and this
seems to have been universally admitted during the controversy to which
it gave rise. The opinion maintained in this treatise, that comets are
nothing but meteors which occasionally appear in our atmosphere, like
halos and rainbows, savours so little of the sagacity of Galileo that we
should be disposed to question its paternity. His inability to partake
in the general interest which these three comets excited, and to employ
his powerful telescope in observing their phenomena and their movements,
might have had some slight share in the formation of an opinion which
deprived them of their importance as celestial bodies. But, however this
may have been, the treatise of Guiducci afforded a favourable point of
attack to Galileo's enemies, and the dangerous task was entrusted to
Oratio Grassi, a learned Jesuit, who, in a work entitled _The
Astronomical and Philosophical Balance_, criticised the discourse on
comets, under the feigned name of Lotario Sarsi.

Galileo replied to this attack in a volume entitled _Il Saggiatore_, or
_The Assayer_, which, owing to the state of his health, was not
published till the autumn of 1623.[24] This work was written in the form
of a letter to Virginio Cæsarini, a member of the Lyncæan Academy, and
master of the chamber to Urban VIII.[25], who had just ascended the
pontifical throne. It has been long celebrated among literary men for
the beauty of its language, though it is doubtless one of the least
important of Galileo's writings.

The succession of the cardinal Maffeo Barberini to the papal throne,
under the name of Urban VIII., was hailed by Galileo and his friends as
an event favourable to the promotion of science. Urban had not only been
the personal friend of Galileo and of prince Cesi, the founder of the
Lyncæan Academy, but had been intimately connected with that able and
liberal association; and it was, therefore, deemed prudent to secure his
favour and attachment. If Paul III. had, nearly a century before,
patronised Copernicus, and accepted of the dedication of his great work,
it was not unreasonable to expect that, in more enlightened times,
another pontiff might exhibit the same liberality to science.

The plan of securing to Galileo the patronage of Urban VIII. seems to
have been devised by prince Cesi. Although Galileo had not been able for
some years to travel, excepting in a fitter, yet he was urged by the
prince to perform a journey to Rome, for the express purpose of
congratulating his friend upon his elevation to the papal chair. This
request was made in October, 1623; and, though Galileo's health was not
such as to authorise him to undergo so much fatigue, yet he felt the
importance of the advice; and, after visiting Cesi at Acqua Sparta, he
arrived at Rome in the spring of 1624. The reception which he here
experienced far exceeded his most sanguine expectations. During the two
months which he spent in the capital he was permitted to have no fewer
than six long and gratifying audiences of the pope. The kindness of his
holiness was of the most marked description. He not only loaded Galileo
with presents[26], and promised him a pension for his son Vincenzo, but
he wrote a letter to Ferdinand, who had just succeeded Cosmo as grand
duke of Tuscany, recommending Galileo to his particular patronage. "For
we find in him," says he, "not only literary distinction, but the love of
piety; and he is strong in those qualities by which pontifical good-will
is easily obtained. And now, when he has been brought to this city to
congratulate us on our elevation, we have very lovingly embraced him;
nor can we suffer him to return to the country whither your liberality
recalls him, without an ample provision of pontifical love. And that you
may know how dear he is to us, we have willed to give him this
honourable testimonial of virtue and piety. And we further signify, that
every benefit which you shall confer upon him, imitating or even
surpassing your father's liberality, will conduce to our gratification."

Not content with thus securing the friendship of the pope, Galileo
endeavoured to bespeak the good-will of the cardinals towards the
Copernican system. He had, accordingly, many interviews with several of
these dignitaries; and he was assured, by cardinal Hohenzoller, that in
a representation which he had made to the pope on the subject of
Copernicus, he stated to his holiness, "that as all the heretics
considered that system as undoubted, it would be necessary to be very
circumspect in coming to any resolution on the subject." To this remark
his holiness replied,--"that the church had not condemned this system;
and that it should not be condemned as heretical, but only as rash;" and
he added, "that there was no fear of any person undertaking to prove
that it must necessarily be true."

The recent appointment of the abbé Castelli, the friend and pupil of
Galileo, to be mathematician to the pope, was an event of a most
gratifying nature; and when we recollect that it was to Castelli that he
addressed the famous letter which was pronounced heretical by the
inquisition, we must regard it also as an event indicative of à new and
favourable feeling towards the friends of science. The opinions of
Urban, indeed, had suffered no change. He was one of the few cardinals
who had opposed the inquisitorial decree of 1616, and his subsequent
demeanour was in every respect conformable to the liberality of his
early views. The sincerity of his conduct was still further evinced by
the grant of a pension of one hundred crowns to Galileo, a few years
after his visit to Rome; but there is reason to think that this
allowance was not regularly paid.

The death of Cosmo, whose liberality had given him both affluence and
leisure, threatened Galileo with pecuniary difficulties. He had been
involved in a "great load of debt," owing to the circumstances of his
brother's family; and, in order to relieve himself, he had requested
Castelli to dispose of the pension of his son Vincenzo: but he was now
alarmed at the prospect of losing his salary as an extraordinary
professor at Pisa. The great youth of Ferdinand, who was scarcely of
age, induced Galileo's enemies, in 1629, to raise doubts respecting the
payment of a salary to a professor who neither resided nor lectured in
the university; but the question was decided in his favour, and we have
no doubt that the decision was facilitated by the friendly
recommendation of the pope, to which we have already referred.

Although Galileo had made a narrow escape from the grasp of the
inquisition, yet he was never sufficiently sensible of the lenity which
he experienced. When he left Rome in 1616, under the solemn pledge of
never again teaching the obnoxious doctrine, it was with an hostility
against the church, suppressed but deeply cherished; and his resolution
to propagate the heresy seems to have been coeval with the vow by which
he renounced it. In the year 1618, when he communicated his theory of
the tides to the archduke Leopold, he alludes in the most sarcastic
manner to the conduct of the church. The same hostile tone, more or
less, pervaded all his writings, and, while he laboured to sharpen the
edge of his satire, he endeavoured to guard himself against its effects,
by an affectation of the humblest deference to the decisions of
theology. Had Galileo stood alone, his devotion to science might have
withdrawn him from so hopeless a contest; but he was spurred on by the
violence of a party. The Lyncæan Academy never scrupled to summon him
from his researches. They placed him in the forlorn hope of their
combat, and he at last fell a victim to the rashness of his adventure.

But, whatever allowance we may make for the ardour of Galileo's temper,
and the peculiarity of his position; and however we may justify and even
approve of his past conduct, his visit to Urban VIII., in 1624, placed
him in a new relation to the church, which demanded on his part a new
and corresponding demeanour. The noble and generous reception which he
met with from Urban, and the liberal declaration of cardinal Hohenzoller
on the subject of the Copernican system, should have been regarded as
expressions of regret for the past, and offers of conciliation for the
future. Thus honoured by the head of the church, and befriended by its
dignitaries, Galileo must have felt himself secure against the indignity
of its lesser functionaries, and in the possession of the fullest
licence to prosecute his researches and publish his discoveries,
provided he avoided that dogma of the church which, even in the present
day, it has not ventured to renounce. But Galileo was bound to the
Romish hierarchy by even stronger ties. His son and himself were
pensioners of the church, and, having accepted of its alms, they owed to
it, at least, a decent and respectful allegiance. The pension thus given
by Urban was not a remuneration which sovereigns sometimes award to the
services of their subjects. Galileo was a foreigner at Rome. The
sovereign of the papal state owed him no obligation; and hence we must
regard the pension of Galileo as a donation from the Roman pontiff to
science itself, and as a declaration to the Christian world, that
religion was not jealous of philosophy, and that the church of Rome was
willing to respect and foster even the genius of its enemies.

Galileo viewed all these circumstances in a different light. He resolved
to compose a work in which the Copernican system should be demonstrated;
but he had not the courage to do this in a direct and open manner. He
adopted the plan of discussing the subject in a dialogue between three
speakers, in the hope of eluding by this artifice the censure of the
church. This work was completed in 1630, but, owing to some difficulties
in obtaining a licence to print it, it was not published till 1632.

In obtaining this licence, Galileo exhibited considerable address, and
his memory has not escaped from the imputation of having acted unfairly,
and of having involved his personal friends in the consequences of his
imprudence.

The situation of master of the palace was, fortunately for Galileo's
designs, filled by Nicolo Riccardi, a friend and pupil of his own. This
officer was a sort of censor of new publications, and when he was
applied to on the subject of printing his work, Galileo soon found that
attempts had previously been made to thwart his views. He instantly set
off for Rome, and had an interview with his friend, who was in every
respect anxious to oblige him. Riccardi examined the manuscript, pointed
out some incautious expressions which he considered it necessary to
erase, and returned it with his written approbation, on the
understanding that the alterations he suggested would be made. Dreading
to remain in Rome during the unhealthy season, which was fast
approaching, Galileo returned to Florence, with the intention of
completing the index and dedication, and of sending the MS. to Rome, to
be printed under the care of prince Cesi. The death of that
distinguished individual, in August 1630, frustrated Galileo's plan, and
he applied for leave to have the book printed in Florence. Riccardi was
at first desirous to examine the MS. again, but after inspecting only
the beginning and the end of it, he gave Galileo leave to print it
wherever he chose, providing it bore the licence of the
inquisitor-general of Florence, and one or two other persons whom he
named. Having overcome all these difficulties, Galileo's work was
published in 1632, under the title of "The System of the World of
Galileo Galilei, &c., in which, in four dialogues concerning the two
principal systems of the World,--the Ptolemaic and the Copernican,--he
discusses, indeterminately and firmly, the arguments proposed on both
sides." It is dedicated to Ferdinand, grand duke of Tuscany, and is
prefaced by an "Address to the prudent reader," which is itself
characterised by the utmost imprudence. He refers to the decree of the
inquisition in the most insulting and ironical language. He attributes
it to passion and to ignorance, not by direct assertion, but by
insinuations ascribed to others; and he announces his intention to
defend the Copernican system, as a pure mathematical hypothesis, and not
as an opinion, having an advantage over that of the stability of the
earth absolutely. The dialogue is conducted by three persons, Salviati,
Sagredo, and Simplicio. Salviati, who is the true philosopher in the
dialogue, was the real name of a nobleman whom we have already had
occasion to mention. Sagredo, the name of another noble friend of
Galileo's, performs a secondary part under Salviati. He proposes doubts,
suggests difficulties, and enlivens the gravity of the dialogue with his
wit and pleasantry. Simplicio is a resolute follower of Ptolemy and
Aristotle, and with a proper degree of candour and modesty, he brings
forward all the common arguments in favour of the Ptolemaic system.
Between the wit of Sagredo, and the powerful philosophy of Salviati, the
peripatetic sage is baffled in every discussion; and there can be no
doubt that Galileo aimed a more fatal blow at the Ptolemaic system by
this mode of discussing it, than if he had endeavoured to overturn it by
direct arguments.

The influence of this work on the public mind was such as might have
been anticipated. The obnoxious doctrines which it upheld were eagerly
received, and widely disseminated; and the church of Rome became
sensible of the shock which was thus given to its intellectual
supremacy. Pope Urban VIII., attached though he had been to Galileo,
never once hesitated respecting the line of conduct which he felt
himself bound to pursue. His mind was, nevertheless, agitated with
conflicting sentiments. He entertained a sincere affection for science
and literature, and yet he was placed in the position of their enemy. He
had been the personal friend of Galileo, and yet his duty compelled him
to become his accuser. Embarrassing as these feelings were, other
considerations contributed to soothe him. He had, in his capacity of a
cardinal, opposed the first persecution of Galileo. He had, since his
elevation to the pontificate, traced an open path for the march of
Galileo's discoveries; and he had finally endeavoured to bind the
recusant philosopher by the chains of kindness and gratitude. All these
means, however, had proved abortive, and he was now called upon to
support the doctrine which he had subscribed, and administer the law of
which he was the guardian.

It has been supposed, without any satisfactory evidence, that Urban may
have been influenced by less creditable motives. Salviati and Sagredo
being well-known personages, it was inferred, that Simplicio must also
have a representative. The enemies of Galileo are said to have convinced
his holiness that Simplicio was intended as a portraiture of himself;
and this opinion received some probability from the fact, that the
peripatetic disputant had employed many of the arguments which Urban had
himself used in his discussions with Galileo. The latest biographer of
Galileo[27] regards this motive as necessary to account for "the
otherwise inexplicable change which took place in the conduct of Urban
to his old friend;"--but we cannot admit for a moment the truth, of this
supposition. The church had been placed in hostility to a powerful and
liberal party, which was adverse to its interests. The dogmas of the
Catholic faith had been brought into direct collision with the
deductions of science. The leader of the philosophic band had broken the
most solemn armistice with the inquisition: he had renounced the ties of
gratitude which bound him to the pontiff; and Urban was thus compelled
to intrench himself in a position to which he had been driven by his
opponents.

The design of summoning Galileo before the inquisition, seems to have
been formed almost immediately after the publication of his book; for
even in August, 1632, the preliminary proceedings had reached the ears
of the grand duke Ferdinand. The Tuscan ambassador at Rome was speedily
acquainted with the dissatisfaction which his sovereign felt at these
proceedings; and he was instructed to forward to Florence a written
statement of the charges against Galileo, in order to enable him to
prepare for his defence. Although this request was denied, Ferdinand
again interposed; and transmitted a letter to his ambassador,
recommending the admission of Campanella and Castelli into the
congregation of ecclesiastics by which Galileo was to be judged.
Circumstances, however, rendered it prudent to withhold this letter.
Castelli was sent away from Rome, and Scipio Chiaramonte, a bigotted
ecclesiastic, was summoned from Pisa to complete the number of the
judges.

It appears from a despatch of the Tuscan minister, that Ferdinand was
enraged at the transaction; and he instructed his ambassador, Niccolini,
to make the strongest representations to the pope. Niccolini had several
interviews with his holiness; but all his expostulations were fruitless.
He found Urban highly incensed against Galileo; and his holiness begged
Niccolini to advise the archduke not to interfere any farther, as he
would not "get through it with honour." On the 15th of September the
pope caused it to be intimated to Niccolini, as a mark of his especial
esteem for the grand duke, that he was obliged to refer the work to the
inquisition; but both the prince and his ambassador were declared liable
to the usual censures if they divulged the secret.

From the measures which this tribunal had formerly pursued, it was not
difficult to foresee the result of their present deliberations. They
summoned Galileo to appear before them at Rome, to answer in person the
charges under which he lay. The Tuscan ambassador expostulated warmly
with the court of Rome on the inhumanity of this proceeding. He urged
his advanced age, his infirm health, the discomforts of the journey, and
the miseries of the quarantine[28], as motives for reconsidering their
decision: but the pope was inexorable; and though it was agreed to relax
the quarantine as much as possible in his favour, yet it was declared
indispensable that he should appear in person before the inquisition.

Worn out with age and infirmities, and exhausted with the fatigues of
his journey, Galileo arrived at Rome on the 14th of February, 1633. The
Tuscan ambassador announced his arrival in an official form to the
commissary of the holy office, and Galileo awaited in calm dignity the
approach of his trial. Among those who proffered their advice in this
distressing emergency, we must enumerate the cardinal Barberino, the
pope's nephew, who, though he may have felt the necessity of an
interference on the part of the church, was yet desirous that it should
be effected with the least injury to Galileo and to science. He
accordingly visited Galileo, and advised him to remain as much at home
as possible, to keep aloof from general society, and to see only his
most intimate friends. The same advice was given from different
quarters; and Galileo felt its propriety, and remained in strict
seclusion in the palace of the Tuscan ambassador.

During the whole of the trial which now commenced, Galileo was treated
with the most marked indulgence. Abhorring, as we must do, the
principles and practice of this odious tribunal, and reprobating its
interference with the cautious deductions of science, we must yet admit
that, on this occasion, its deliberations were not dictated by passion,
nor its power directed by vengeance. Though placed at their
judgment-seat as a heretic, Galileo stood there with the recognised
attributes of a sage; and though an offender against the laws of which
they were the guardian, yet the highest respect was yielded to his
genius, and the kindest commiseration to his infirmities.

In the beginning of April, when his examination in person was to
commence, it became necessary that he should be removed to the holy
office; but instead of committing him, as was the practice, to solitary
confinement, he was provided with apartments in the house of the fiscal
of the inquisition. His table was provided by the Tuscan ambassador, and
his servant was allowed to attend him at his pleasure, and to sleep in
an adjoining apartment. Even this nominal confinement, however,
Galileo's high spirit was unable to brook. An attack of the disease to
which he was constitutionally subject contributed to fret and irritate
him, and he became impatient for a release from his anxiety as well as
from his bondage. Cardinal Barberino seems to have received notice of
the state of Galileo's feelings; and with a magnanimity which posterity
will ever honour, he liberated Galileo on his own responsibility; and in
ten days after his first examination, and on the last day of April, he
was restored to the hospitable roof of the Tuscan ambassador.

Though this favour was granted on the condition of his remaining in
strict seclusion, Galileo recovered his health, and to a certain degree
his usual hilarity, amid the kind attentions of Niccolini and his
family; and when the want of exercise had begun to produce symptoms of
indisposition, Niccolini obtained for him leave to go into the public
gardens in a half-closed carriage.

After the inquisition had examined Galileo personally, they allowed him
a reasonable time for preparing his defence. He felt the difficulty of
adducing any thing like a plausible justification of his conduct; and he
resorted to an ingenious, though a shallow artifice, which was regarded
by the court as an aggravation of the crime. After his first appearance
before the inquisition in 1616, he was publicly and falsely charged by
his enemies with having then abjured his opinions; and he was taunted as
a criminal who had been actually punished for his offences. As a
refutation of these calumnies. Cardinal Bellarmine had given him a
certificate in his own handwriting, declaring that he neither abjured
his opinions, nor suffered punishment for them; and that the doctrine of
the earth's motion, and the sun's stability, was only denounced to him
as contrary to scripture, and as one which could not be defended. To
this certificate the cardinal did not add, because he was not called
upon to do it, that Galileo was enjoined not _to teach in any manner_
the doctrine thus denounced; and Galileo ingeniously avails himself of
this supposed omission, to account for his having, in the lapse of
fourteen or sixteen years, forgotten the injunction. He assigned the
same excuse for his having omitted to mention this injunction to
Riccardi, and to the inquisitor-general at Florence, when he obtained
the licence to print his dialogues. The court held the production of
this certificate to be at once a proof and an aggravation of his
offence; because the certificate itself declared that the obnoxious
doctrines had been pronounced contrary to the Holy Scriptures.

Having duly weighed the confessions and excuses of their prisoner, and
considered the general merits of the case, the inquisition came to an
agreement upon the sentence which they were to pronounce, and appointed
the 22d of June as the day on which it was to be delivered. Two days
previous to this, Galileo was summoned to appear at the holy office; and
on the morning of the 21st, he obeyed the summons. On the 22d of June he
was clothed in a penitential dress, and conducted to the convent of
Minerva, where the inquisition was assembled to give judgment. A long
and elaborate sentence was pronounced, detailing the former proceedings
of the inquisition, and specifying the offences which he had committed
in teaching heretical doctrines, in violating his former pledges, and in
obtaining by improper means a licence for the printing of his Dialogues.
After an invocation of the name of our Saviour, and of the Holy Virgin,
Galileo is declared to have brought himself under strong suspicions of
heresy, and to have incurred all the censures and penalties which are
enjoined against delinquents of this kind; but from all these
consequences he is to be held absolved, provided that with a sincere
heart, and a faith unfeigned, he abjures and curses the heresies he has
cherished, as well as every other heresy against the Catholic church. In
order that his offence might not go altogether unpunished, that he might
be more cautious in future, and be a warning to others to abstain from
similar delinquencies, it was also decreed that his Dialogues should be
prohibited by public edict; that he himself should be condemned to the
prison of the inquisition during their pleasure, and that during the
next three years he should recite once a week the seven penitential
psalms.

The ceremony of Galileo's abjuration was one of exciting interest, and
of awful formality. Clothed in the sackcloth of a repentant criminal,
the venerable sage fell upon his knees before the assembled cardinals;
and laying his hands upon the Holy Evangelists, he invoked the divine
aid in abjuring and detesting, and vowing never again to teach, the
doctrine of the earth's motion, and of the sun's stability. He pledged
himself that he would never again, either in words or in writing,
propagate such heresies; and he swore that he would fulfil and observe
the penances which had been inflicted upon him.[29] At the conclusion of
this ceremony, in which he recited his abjuration word for word, and
then signed it, he was conveyed, in conformity with his sentence, to the
prison of the inquisition.

The account which we have now given of the trial and the sentence of
Galileo, is pregnant with the deepest interest and instruction. Human
nature is here drawn in its darkest colouring; and in surveying the
melancholy picture, it is difficult to decide whether religion or
philosophy has been most degraded. While we witness the presumptuous
priest pronouncing infallible the decrees of his own erring judgment, we
see the high-minded philosopher abjuring the eternal and immutable
truths which he had himself the glory of establishing. In the ignorance
and prejudices of the age,--in a too literal interpretation of the
language of Scripture,--in a mistaken respect for the errors that had
become venerable from their antiquity,--and in the peculiar position
which Galileo had taken among the avowed enemies of the church, we may
find the elements of an apology, however poor it may he, for the conduct
of the inquisition. But what excuse can we devise for the humiliating
confession and abjuration of Galileo? Why did this master-spirit of the
age--this high-priest of the stars--this representative of science--this
hoary sage, whose career of glory was near its consummation,--why did he
reject the crown of martyrdom which he had himself coveted, and which,
plaited with immortal laurels, was about to descend upon his head? If,
in place of disavowing the laws of nature, and surrendering in his own
person the intellectual dignity of his species, he had boldly owned the
truth of his opinions, and confided his character to posterity, and his
cause to an all-ruling Providence, he would have strung up the
hair-suspended sabre, and disarmed for ever the hostility which
threatened to overwhelm him. The philosopher, however, was supported
only by philosophy; and in the love of truth he found a miserable
substitute for the hopes of the martyr. Galileo cowered under the fear
of man, and his submission was the salvation of the church. The sword of
the inquisition descended on his prostrate neck; and though its stroke
was not physical, yet it fell with a moral influence fatal to the
character of its victim, and to the dignity of science.

In studying with attention this portion of scientific history, the
reader will not fail to perceive that the church of Rome was driven into
a dilemma from which the submission and abjuration of Galileo could
alone extricate it. He who confesses a crime and denounces its atrocity,
not only sanctions but inflicts the punishment which is annexed to it.
If Galileo had declared his innocence, and avowed his sentiments; and if
he had appealed to the past conduct of the church itself, to the
acknowledged opinions of its dignitaries, and even to the acts of its
pontiffs, he would have at once confounded his accusers, and escaped
from their toils. After Copernicus, himself a catholic priest, had
_openly_ maintained the motion of the earth, and the stability of the
sun: after he had dedicated the work which advocated these opinions to
pope Paul III., on the express ground that the _authority of the
pontiff_ might silence the calumnies of those who attacked these
opinions by arguments drawn from Scripture: after the cardinal Schonherg
and the bishop of Culm had urged Copernicus to publish the new
doctrines; and after the bishop of Ermeland had erected a monument to
commemorate his great discoveries; how could the church of Rome have
appealed to its pontifical decrees as the ground of persecuting and
punishing Galileo? Even in later times, the same doctrines had been
propagated with entire toleration; nay, in the very year of Galileo's
first persecution, Paul Anthony Foscarinus, a learned Carmelite monk,
wrote a pamphlet, in which he illustrates and defends the mobility of
the earth, and endeavours to reconcile to this new doctrine the passages
of Scripture which had been employed to subvert it. This very singular
production was dated from the Carmelite convent at Naples; was dedicated
to the very reverend Sebastian Fantoni, general of the Carmelite order;
and, sanctioned by the ecclesiastical authorities, it was published at
Florence, three years before the second persecution of Galileo.

By these acts, tolerated for more than a century, the decrees of the
pontiffs against the doctrine of the earth's motion were virtually
repealed; and Galileo might have pleaded them with success in arrest of
judgment. Unfortunately, however, for himself and for science, he acted
otherwise. By admitting their authority, he revived in fresh force these
obsolete and obnoxious enactments; and, by yielding to their power, he
riveted for another century the almost broken chains of spiritual
despotism.

Pope Urban VII. did not fail to observe the full extent of his triumph;
and he exhibited the utmost sagacity in the means which he employed to
secure it. While he endeavoured to overawe the enemies of the church by
the formal promulgation of Galileo's sentence and abjuration, and by
punishing the officials who had assisted in obtaining the licence to
print his work, he treated Galileo with the utmost lenity, and yielded
to every request that was made to diminish, and almost to suspend, the
constraint under which he lay. The sentence of abjuration was ordered to
be publicly read at several universities. At Florence the ceremonial was
performed in the church of Santa Croce, and the friends and disciples of
Galileo were especially summoned to witness the public degradation of
their master. The inquisitor at Florence was ordered to be reprimanded
for his conduct; and Riccardi, the master of the sacred palace, and
Ciampoli, the secretary of pope Urban himself, were dismissed from their
situations.

Galileo had remained only four days in the prison of the inquisition,
when, on the application of Niccolini, the Tuscan ambassador, he was
allowed to reside with him in his palace. As Florence still suffered
under the contagious disease which we have already mentioned, it was
proposed that Sienna should be the place of Galileo's confinement, and
that his residence should be in one of the convents of that city.
Niccolini, however, recommended the palace of the archbishop Piccolomoni
as a more suitable residence; and though the archbishop was one of
Galileo's best friends, the pope agreed to the arrangement, and in the
beginning of July Galileo quitted Rome for Sienna.

After having spent nearly six months under the hospitable roof of his
friend, with no other restraint than that of being confined to the
limits of the palace, Galileo was permitted to return to his villa near
Florence under the same restrictions; and as the contagious disease had
disappeared in Tuscany, he was able in the month of December to re-enter
his own house at Arcetri, where he spent the remainder of his days.

Although Galileo had now the happiness of rejoining his family under
their paternal roof, yet, like all sublunary blessings, it was but of
short duration. His favourite daughter Maria, who along with her sister
had joined the convent of St. Matthew in the neighbourhood of Arcetri,
had looked forward to the arrival of her father with the most
affectionate anticipation: she hoped that her filial devotion might form
some compensation for the malignity of his enemies; and she eagerly
assumed the labour of reciting weekly the seven penitentiary psalms
which formed part of her father's sentence. These sacred duties,
however, were destined to terminate almost at the moment they were
begun. She was seized with a fatal illness in the same month in which
she rejoined her parent, and before the month of April she was no more.
This heavy blow, so suddenly struck, overwhelmed Galileo in the deepest
agony. Owing to the decline of his health, and the recurrence of his old
complaints, he was unable to oppose to this mental suffering the
constitutional energy of his mind. The bulwarks of his heart broke down,
and a flood of grief desolated his manly and powerful mind. He felt, as
he expressed it, that he was incessantly called by his daughter,--his
pulse intermitted,--his heart was agitated with unceasing
palpitations,--his appetite entirely left him, and he considered his
dissolution so near at hand, that he would not permit his son Vicenzo to
set out upon a journey which he had contemplated.

From this state of melancholy and indisposition, Galileo slowly, though
partially, recovered; and, with the view of obtaining medical
assistance, he requested leave to go to Florence. His enemies, however,
refused this application, and he was given to understand that any
additional importunities would be visited with a more vigilant
surveillance. He remained, therefore, five years at Arcetri, from 1634
to 1638, without any remission of his confinement, and pursuing his
studies under the influence of a continued and general indisposition.

There is no reason to think that Galileo or his friends renewed their
application to the church of Rome; but, in 1638, the pope transmitted,
through the inquisitor Fariano, his permission that he might remove to
Florence for the recovery of his health, on the condition that he should
present himself at the office of the inquisitor to learn the terms upon
which this indulgence was granted. Galileo accepted of the kindness thus
unexpectedly proffered; but the conditions upon which it was given were
more severe than he expected: he was prohibited from leaving his house,
or admitting his friends; and so sternly was this system pursued, that
he required a special order for attending mass during Passion week.

The severity of this order was keenly felt by Galileo. While he remained
at Arcetri, his seclusion from the world would have been an object of
choice, if it had not been the decree of a tribunal; but to be debarred
from the conversation of his friends in Florence,--in that city where
his genius had been idolised, and where his fame had become immortal,
was an aggravation of punishment which he was unable to bear. With his
accustomed kindness, the grand duke made a strong representation on the
subject to his ambassador at the court of Rome. He stated that, from his
great age and infirmities, Galileo's career was near its close; that he
possessed many valuable ideas, which the world might lose if they were
not matured and conveyed to his friends; and that Galileo was anxious to
make these communications to father Castelli, who was then a stipendiary
of the court of Rome. The grand duke commanded his ambassador to see
Castelli on the subject; to urge him to obtain leave from the pope to
spend a few months in Florence, and to supply him with money, and every
thing that was necessary for his journey. Influenced by this kind and
liberal message. Castelli obtained an audience of the pope, and
requested leave to pay a visit to Florence. Urban instantly suspected
the object of his journey; and, upon Castelli's acknowledging that he
could not possibly refrain from seeing Galileo, he received permission
to visit him in the company of an officer of the inquisition. Castelli
accordingly went to Florence; and, a few months afterwards, Galileo was
ordered to return to Arcetri.

During Galileo's confinement at Sienna and Arcetri, between 1633 and
1636, his time was principally occupied in the composition of his
"Dialogues on Local Motion." This remarkable work, which was considered
by its author as the best of his productions, was printed by Louis
Elzevir, at Amsterdam, and dedicated to the count de Noailles, the
French ambassador at Rome. Various attempts to have it printed in
Germany had failed; and, in order to save himself from the malignity of
his enemies, he was obliged to pretend that the edition published in
Holland had been printed from a MS. entrusted to the French ambassador.

Although Galileo had for a long time abandoned his astronomical studies,
yet his attention was directed, about the year 1636, to a curious
appearance in the lunar disc, which is known by the name of the moons
libration. When we examine with a telescope the outline of the moon, we
observe that certain parts of her disc, which are seen at one time, are
invisible at another. This change or libration is of four different
kinds; viz. the diurnal libration, the libration in longitude, the
libration in latitude, and the spheroidal libration. Galileo discovered
the first of these kinds of libration, and appears to have had some
knowledge of the second; but the third was discovered by Hevelius, and
the fourth by Lagrange.[30]

This curious discovery was the result of the last telescopic
observations of Galileo. Although his right eye had for some years lost
its power, yet his general vision was sufficiently perfect to enable him
to carry on his usual researches. In 1636, however, this affection of
his eye became more serious; and, in 1637, his left eye was attacked
with the same disease. His medical friends at first supposed that
cataracts were formed in the crystalline lens, and anticipated a cure
from the operation of couching. These hopes were fallacious. The disease
turned out to be in the cornea, and every attempt to restore its
transparency was fruitless. In a few months the white cloud covered the
whole aperture of the pupil, and Galileo became totally blind. This
sudden and unexpected calamity had almost overwhelmed Galileo and his
friends. In writing to a correspondent he exclaims, "Alas! your dear
friend and servant has become totally and irreparably blind. These
heavens, this earth, this universe, which by wonderful observation I had
enlarged a thousand times beyond the belief of past ages, are henceforth
shrunk into the narrow space which I myself occupy. So it pleases God;
it shall, therefore, please me also." His friend, father Castelli,
deplores the calamity in the same tone of pathetic sublimity:--"The
noblest eye," says he, "which nature ever made, is darkened; an eye so
privileged, and gifted with such rare powers, that it may truly be said
to have seen more than the eyes of all that are gone, and to have opened
the eyes of all that are to come."

Although Galileo had been thwarted in his attempt to introduce into the
Spanish marine his new method of finding the longitude at sea, yet he
never lost sight of an object to which he attached the highest
importance. As the formation of correct tables of the motion of
Jupiter's satellites was a necessary preliminary to its introduction, he
had occupied himself for twenty-four years in observations for this
purpose, and he had made considerable progress in this laborious task.
After the publication of his "Dialogues on Motion," in 1636, he renewed
his attempts to bring his method into actual use. For this purpose he
addressed himself to Lorenzo Real, who had been the Dutch
governor-general in India, and offered the free use of his method to the
states-general of Holland.[31] The Dutch government received this
proposal with an anxious desire to have it carried into effect. At the
instigation of Constantine Huygens, the father of the illustrious
Huygens, and the secretary to the prince of Orange, they appointed
commissioners to communicate with Galileo; and while they transmitted
him a gold chain as a mark of their esteem, they at the same time
assured him, that if his plan should prove successful it should not pass
unrewarded. The commissioners entered into an active correspondence with
Galileo, and had even appointed one of their number to communicate
personally with him in Italy. Lest this, however, should excite the
jealousy of the court of Rome, Galileo objected to the arrangement, so
that the negotiation was carried on solely by correspondence.

It was at this time that Galileo was struck with blindness. His friend
and pupil, Renieri, undertook, in this emergency, to arrange and
complete his observations and calculations; but before he had made much
progress in the arduous task, each of the four commissioners died in
succession, and it was with great difficulty that Constantine Huygens
succeeded in renewing the scheme. It was again obstructed, however, by
the death of Galileo; and when Renieri was about to publish, by the
order of the grand duke, the "Ephemeris," and "Tables of the Jovian
Planets," he was attacked with a mortal disease, and the manuscripts of
Galileo, which he was on the eve of publishing, were never more heard
of. By such a series of misfortunes were the plans of Galileo and of the
states-general completely overthrown. It is some consolation, however,
to know that neither science nor navigation suffered any severe loss.
Notwithstanding the perfection of our present tables of Jupiter's
satellites, and of the astronomical instruments by which their eclipses
may be observed, the method of Galileo is still impracticable at sea.

In consequence of the strict seclusion to which Galileo had been
subjected, he was in the practice of dating his letters from his prison
at Arcetri: but after he had lost the use of his eyes, the Inquisition
seems to have relaxed its severity, and to have allowed him the freest
intercourse with his friends. The grand duke of Tuscany paid him
frequent visits; and among the celebrated strangers who came from
distant lands to see the ornament of Italy, were Gassendi, Deodati, and
our illustrious countryman Milton. During the last three years of his
life, his eminent pupil Viviani formed one of his family; and in
October, 1611, the celebrated Torricelli, another of his pupils, was
admitted to the same distinction.

Though the powerful mind of Galileo still retained its vigour, yet his
debilitated frame was exhausted with mental labour. He often complained
that his head was too busy for his body; and the continuity of his
studies was frequently broken with attacks of hypochondria, want of
sleep, and acute rheumatic pains. Along with these calamities, he was
afflicted with another still more severe--with deafness almost total;
but though he was now excluded from all communication with the external
world, yet his mind still grappled with the material universe, and while
he was studying the force of percussion, and preparing for a
continuation of his "Dialogues on Motion," he was attacked with fever
and palpitation of the heart, which, after continuing two months,
terminated fatally on the 8th of January, 1642, in the 78th year of his
age.

Having died in the character of a prisoner of the Inquisition, this
odious tribunal disputed his right of making a will, and of being buried
in consecrated ground. These objections, however, were withdrawn; but
though a large sum was subscribed for erecting a monument to him in the
church of Santa Croce, in Florence, the pope would not permit the design
to be carried into execution. His sacred remains were, therefore,
deposited in an obscure corner of the church, and remained for more than
thirty years unmarked with any monumental tablet. The following epitaph,
given without any remark in the Leyden edition of his Dialogues, is, we
presume, the one which was inscribed on a tablet in the church of Santa
Croce:--


GALILÆO GALILÆI FIORENTINO,
Philosopho et Geometræ vere lynceo,
Natura Œdipo,
Mirabilium semper inventorum machinatori,
Qui inconcessa adhuc mortalibus gloria
Cælorum provincias auxit
Et universo dedit incrementum:
Non enim vitreos spherarum orbes
Fragilesque stellas conflavit:
Sed æterna mundi corpore
Mediceæ beneficentiae dedicavit,
Cujus inextincta gloriæ cupiditas
Ut oculos nationum
Sæculorumque omnium
Videre doceret,
Proprios impendit oculos.
Cum jam nil amplius haberet natura
Quod ipse videret.
Cujus inventa vix intra rerum limites comprehensa
Firmamentum ipsum non solum continet,
Sed etiam recipit.
Qui relictis tot scientiarum monumentis
Plura secum tulit, quam reliquit.
Gravi enim
Sed nondum affecta senectute,
Novis contemplationibus
Majorem gloriam affectans
Inexplebilem sapientiæ animam
Immaturo nobis obi tu
Exhalavit
Anno Domini
MCXLII.
Ætatis suæ
LXXVIII.


At his death, in 1703, Viviani purchased his property, with the charge
of erecting a monument over Galileo's remains and his own. This design
was not carried into effect till 1737, at the expense of the family of
Nelli, when both their bodies were disinterred, and removed to the site
of the splendid monument which now covers them. This monument contains
the bust of Galileo, with figures of Geometry and Astronomy. It was
designed by Giulio Foggini. Galileo's bust was executed by Giovanni
Battista Foggini; the figure of Astronomy by Vincenzio Foggini, his son;
and that of Geometry by Girolamo Ticciati.

Galileo's house at Arcetri still remains. In 1821 it belonged to one
Signor Alimari, having been preserved in the state in which it was left
by Galileo; it stands very near the convent of St. Matthew, and about a
mile to the S. E. of Florence. An inscription by Nelli, over the door of
the house, still remains.

The character of Galileo, whether we view him as a member of the social
circle, or as a man of science, presents many interesting and
instructive points of contemplation. Unfortunate, and to a certain
extent immoral, in his domestic relations, he did not derive from that
hallowed source all the enjoyments which it generally yields; and it was
owing to this cause, perhaps, that he was more fond of society than
might have been expected from his studious habits. His habitual
cheerfulness and gaiety, and his affability and frankness of manner,
rendered him an universal favourite among his friends. Without any of
the pedantry of exclusive talent, and without any of that ostentation
which often marks the man of limited though profound acquirements,
Galileo never conversed upon scientific or philosophical subjects except
among those who were capable of understanding them. The extent of his
general information, indeed, his great literary knowledge, but, above
all, his retentive memory, stored with the legends and the poetry of
ancient times, saved him from the necessity of drawing upon his own
peculiar studies for the topics of his conversation.

Galileo was not less distinguished for his hospitality and benevolence;
he was liberal to the poor, and generous in the aid which he
administered to men of genius and talent, who often found a comfortable
asylum under his roof. In his domestic economy he was frugal without
being parsimonious. His hospitable board was ever ready for the
reception of his friends; and, though he was himself abstemious in his
diet, he seems to have been a lover of good wines, of which he received
always the choicest varieties out of the grand duke's cellar. This
peculiar taste, together with his attachment to a country life, rendered
him fond of agricultural pursuits, and induced him to devote his leisure
hours to the cultivation of his vineyards.

In his personal appearance Galileo was about the middle size, and of a
square-built, but well-proportioned, frame. His complexion was fair, his
eyes penetrating, and his hair of a reddish hue. His expression was
cheerful and animated, and though his temper was easily ruffled, yet the
excitement was transient, and the cause of it speedily forgotten.

One of the most prominent traits in the character of Galileo was his
invincible love of truth, and his abhorrence of that spiritual despotism
which had so long brooded over Europe. His views, however, were too
liberal, and too far in advance of the age which he adorned; and however
much we may admire the noble spirit which he evinced, and the personal
sacrifices which he made, in his struggle for truth, we must yet lament
the hotness of his zeal and the temerity of his onset. In his contest
with the church of Rome, he fell under her victorious banner; and though
his cause was that of truth, and hers that of superstition, yet the
sympathy of Europe was not roused by his misfortunes. Under the
sagacious and peaceful sway of Copernicus, astronomy had effected a
glorious triumph over the dogmas of the church; but under the bold and
uncompromising sceptre of Galileo all her conquests were irrecoverably
lost.

The scientific character of Galileo, and his method of investigating
truth, demand our warmest admiration. The number and ingenuity of his
inventions; the brilliant discoveries which he made in the heavens, and
the depth and beauty of his researches respecting the laws of motion,
have gained him the admiration of every succeeding age, and have placed
him next to Newton in the lists of original and inventive genius. To
this high rank he was doubtless elevated by the inductive processes
which he followed in all his inquiries. Under the sure guidance of
observation and experiment, he advanced to general laws; and if Bacon
had never lived, the student of nature would have found, in the writings
and labours of Galileo, not only the boasted principles of the inductive
philosophy, but also their practical application to the highest efforts
of invention and discovery.


[Footnote 1: Childe Harold, canto IV. stanza LIV.]

[Footnote 2: Life of Galileo, Library of Useful Knowledge, p. 1.]

[Footnote 3: De Insidentibus in Fluido.]

[Footnote 4: Opere di Galileo. Milano, 1810, vol. IV. p. 248.]

[Footnote 5: Life of Galileo, in Library of Useful Knowledge, p. 9.]

[Footnote 6: Systema Cosmicum, Dial. II. p. 121.]

[Footnote 7: The authenticity of this work has been doubted. It was
printed at Rome, in 1656, from a MS. in the library of Somasohi, at
Venice. See Opere di Galileo, tom. VII. p. 427.]

[Footnote 8: Incredibili animi jucunditate.--_Sid._]

[Footnote 9: Nescio quo fato ductus.]

[Footnote 10: Berlin Ephemeris, 1788.]

[Footnote 11: Edin. Phil. Journ. vol. VI. p. 313.]

[Footnote 12: Life and Correspondence of Dr. Bradley. Oxford, 1832, p.
523.]

[Footnote 13: See page 22.]

[Footnote 14: Edin. Phil. Journ. 1822, vol. VI. p. 317.]

[Footnote 15: Joh. Fabricii Phrysii de Maculis in Sole observatis, et
apparente earum cum Sole conversione, Narratio. Wittemb. 1611.]

[Footnote 16: It does not appear from the history of solar observations,
at what time, and by whom, coloured glasses were first introduced for
permitting the eye to look at the sun with impunity. Fabricius was
obviously quite ignorant of the use of coloured glasses. He observed the
sun when he was in the horizon, and when his brilliancy was impaired by
the interposition of thin clouds and floating vapours; and he advises
those who may repeat his observations, to admit at first to the eye a
small portion of the sun's light, till it is gradually accustomed to its
full splendour. When the sun's altitude became considerable, Fabricius
gave up his observations; which he often continued so long, that he was
scarcely able, for two days together, to see objects with their usual
distinctness.

Scheiner, in his "Apelles post Tabulanti," describes four different ways
of viewing the spots: one of which is by the _interposition of blue or
green glasses._ His first method was to observe the sun near the
horizon; the second was to view him through a transparent cloud; the
third was to look at him through his telescope with a blue or a green
glass of a proper thickness, and plane on both sides, or to use a thin
blue glass when the sun was covered with a thin vapour or cloud; and the
fourth method was to begin and observe the sun at his margin, till the
eye gradually reached the middle of his disc.]

[Footnote 17: See Istoria e Demostrazioni, intorna alle macchie solari.
_Roma_, 1613. See Opere di Galileo, vol. V. p. 131-293.]

[Footnote 18: Discorso intorno alle cose che stanno in sa l'acqua, o che
in quella si muovono. Opere di Galileo, vol. II. pp. 165-311.]

[Footnote 19: Opere di Galileo, vol. II. pp. 355-367.]

[Footnote 20: Ibid. 367-390.]

[Footnote 21: These three treatises occupy the whole of the third volume
of the Opere di Galileo.]

[Footnote 22: It is said that Galileo was cited to appear at Rome on
this occasion; and the opinion is not without foundation.]

[Footnote 23: Printed in the Opere di Galileo, vol. VI. pp. 117-191.]

[Footnote 24: Printed in the Opere di Galileo, vol. VI. pp. 191-571.]

[Footnote 25: This work is said to have been dedicated to Urban VIII.
himself (Lib. U. Knowledge, Life of Galileo, chap, VII.), but there is
no dedication prefixed to the edition we have referred to; and it is,
besides, unusual to dedicate a volume to any person when that volume has
the form of a letter to another.]

[Footnote 26: A fine painting in gold, and a silver medal, and "a good
quantity of agnus dei."]

[Footnote 27: Library of Useful Knowledge, Life of Galileo, chap. VIII.]

[Footnote 28: The communication between Florence and Rome was at this
time interrupted by a contagious disease which had broken out in
Tuscany.]

[Footnote 29: It has been said, but upon what authority we cannot find,
that when Galileo rose from his knees, he stamped on the ground, and
said in a whisper to one of his friends, "_E pur si muove._" "It does
move, though."--Life of Galileo, Lib. Use. Knowledge, part II. p. 63.]

[Footnote 30: These phenomena are explained in the volume on
"Astronomy."]

[Footnote 31: It is a curious fact, that Morin had about this time
proposed to determine the longitude by the moon's distance from a fixed
star, and that the commissioners assembled in Paris to examine it,
requested Galileo's opinion of its value and practicability. Galileo's
opinion was highly unfavourable. He saw clearly, and explained
distinctly, the objection to Morin's method, arising from the
imperfection of the lunar tables, and the inadequacy of astronomical
instruments; but he seemed not to be conscious that the very same
objections applied, with even greater force, to his own method, which
has since been supplanted by that of the French savant. See life of
Galileo, Library of Useful Knowledge, p. 94.]




GUICCIARDINI

1482-1540.


Guicciardini was the contemporary and intimate friend of Machiavelli,
but their several careers bore small similitude; for worldly prosperity
attended the first, while the other was depressed by neglect and penury;
and while his intellect struggled with these chains, the nobler parts of
his disposition yielded to them. Machiavelli was a republican in
principle, of humble for tunes, and dependent on his friends for their
favour and encouragement. Guicciardini was a courtier; he was the
servant of a prince, not of a state; in birth and position in life he
had the advantage of his friend; and these combining circumstances
rendered him more confident in himself, while at the same time it
inspired him with an avowed dislike for popular governments.

The Guicciardini formed one of the noblest families of Florence: it was
of ancient origin, and possessed several magnificent mansions in
Florence. One of the streets is named de' Guicciardini, from containing
a palace belonging to them; and they had large possessions in the Val di
Pesa.

Francesco, the subject of this memoir, was the son of Piero de'
Guicciardini, a celebrated advocate, and at one time commissary-general
to the Florentine army. Francesco was one of eight children. His mother
was Simona, daughter of the cavaliere Bongiani Gianfigliazzi, a noble
Florentine. He was born on the 6th of March, 1482.[32] He was educated
with care by the best masters, and taught Greek and Latin. He applied
himself, as he grew up, to the study of logic and of civil law, as he
was destined for the robe. He was sent to Ferrara by his father, not
merely for the sake of attending the teachers there, but that his parent
might have a place of refuge, where to send his property, in the event
of civil disturbance or external attack upon Florence. Large sums of
money were remitted to him, and he boasts of the trustworthiness of his
conduct on this occasion, despite his extreme youth. It was in agitation
at one time to make him a priest, as, through the interest of an uncle,
who was rich in benefices, a prosperous career was opened to him in the
church. He was himself inclined towards the clerical profession, as one
full of honour and dignity; but his father decided against it, and
resolved that none of his five sons should enter the priesthood; partly
induced by the notion that the papal power was on the decline, and
partly from a conscientious feeling of the impropriety of adopting the
sacred calling, merely for the sake of temporal advantages. Instead,
therefore, of assuming the sacerdotal garb, Francesco took a doctor's
degree in law, and at an early age was appointed by the government to
read the Institute in the university of Florence. He married the
following year. His wife was Maria, daughter of Alamanno di Averardo
Salviati, one of the first men of the city. Several law offices were
bestowed on him, and he prides himself at this success in early life.
But he felt himself still more honoured, when he was sent by the
republic as ambassador to Ferdinand, king of Aragon. Italy was then the
arena on which the adverse powers of France, Germany, and Spain
contended for mastery. Florence adhered to the French party, but the
timid gonfaloniere Soderini, desirous of currying favour on all sides,
thought it right to preserve a good understanding with Ferdinand.
Francesco, feeling his inexperience, shrunk from the responsibility of
this mission, and did not accept it, till his father added his commands
to those of the state.

He remained two years at Burgos, in attendance on the Spanish court,
conducting himself in such a way as to acquire the esteem of Ferdinand,
who presented him with a number of silver vessels of great value on his
departure. This was no good school for the acquirement of political
integrity. The Italians were proverbially treacherous, but Ferdinand
emulated them in the arts of deception. It is related of this monarch,
that when he heard that Louis XII. complained of having been twice
deceived by him, he exclaimed, "The fool lies, I have tricked him above
ten times."

Meanwhile the aspect of affairs changed at Florence. The French were
driven from Italy, and the republic paid the penalty of the weak and
disarmed neutrality which it had preserved, by being forced by the
allied armies to receive back the exiled Medici. The consequence of this
return was a change of government, from that of a free state, to
subjection to the will of a single family. Guicciardini acted with a
prudence that acquired for him the favour of the new rulers; and, on his
return from Spain, was received with every suitable mark of distinction.
His joy, however, on returning to his native town, was clouded by the
recent death of his father.

On the event of the visit of Leo X. to Florence, attended by a numerous
retinue of cardinals, Guicciardini, who had lately filled the office of
magistrate, was sent, with others, to receive the pope at Cortona. Leo
was so struck by him, that the next day he named him his consistorial
advocate, of his own accord, without solicitation: nor did his patronage
stop here; he soon after took him entirely into his service, and finding
that his prudence and sagacity were equal to the good opinion he had
formed of him, he made him governor of Reggio and Modena. He acquitted
himself with great credit in this high office. Having been educated for
the robe, instead of the career of arms, the enemies of the pope
cherished the notion, that he might be surprised and frightened in his
government; but his firmness and judgment disconcerted all their
stratagems.

When Leo X. died, the merits of Guicciardini became yet more
conspicuous. The papal power was very infirmly established in Lombardy,
and the duke of Ferrara, who claimed Modena and Reggio as his own, was
on the alert to take advantage of the interval of weakness caused by a
delay in the election of a new pope; but Guicciardini foiled him in all
his attempts. His most memorable action on this occasion was his defence
of Parma. He relates it with conscious pride in his history. He had been
sent by cardinal Julius de' Medici to defend Parma from an attack made
by the French. Guicciardini's chief difficulty was, to inspire the
citizens with resolution and martial enthusiasm. He convoked them
together, distributed pikes among them, and causing the defenceless part
of the town, on one side of the river, to be abandoned, made strenuous
efforts to intrench the other. The enemy entered the deserted portion,
and the people were eager to surrender. Guicciardini pointed out to them
the fact, that the hostile forces were unprovided with artillery, and so
succeeded in inspiring them with some degree of resolution: he led the
attack himself, and the success that attended their sortie increasing
their courage, the enemy was driven, off and the siege raised. Federigo
da Bozzole, who commanded the attack, had made sure of success, and
declared that he had been deceived in nothing during the expedition,
except in the notion that a governor, who was not a soldier, and who had
newly come to the city, should carry on the defence at his own peril,
when he might have saved himself without dishonour.

When cardinal Julius became pope, under the name of Clement VII., he
showed his approbation of Guicciardini, by naming him president of
Romagna, with greater powers than had been enjoyed by any predecessor in
that office: thus, a large portion of Italy north of the Apennines was
under his rule. It was a situation of honour, but attended with an equal
portion of difficulty and labour, from the unsettled state of the
country. Prudence and firmness, and even severity, were the
characteristics of Guicciardini's administration; he was unrelenting
towards criminals, but at the same time became very popular, in Modena
especially, by the attention he paid to the comfort and pleasures of the
people, and the embellishments he bestowed on the city.

At this time the French were again, after the battle of Pavia, driven
from Italy, and Clement VII., afraid of the overweening power of Charles
V., formed a league against him. The duke of Urbino was chief over the
army of the league, and Guicciardini was named lieutenant-general of the
pontifical army in the ecclesiastical states. The choice that had been
made of the duke of Urbino, as chief leader, was injudicious. He had
been driven from his states by Leo X.; Lorenzo de' Medici had been
gifted with his duchy, and he naturally was inimical to his rival's
family. His irresolute, shuffling conduct during the disastrous advance
of the constable Bourbon on Rome, was doubtless a principal cause of the
sack of that city. Guicciardini, as general of the papal army, exerted
himself in vain to induce him to more energetic measures: instead of
throwing himself before the advancing army of the imperialists, he
slowly followed it. When Bourbon was in the neighbourhood of Arezzo, the
duke of Urbino entered Florence.

The power of the Medici was odious in that city. A formidable party,
whose watchword was liberty, regarded with triumph the dangers to which
Clement VII. was exposed. A number of the younger nobility among them
took occasion of the alarm excited, to seize on the palace of
government. The duke of Urbino prepared to attack it, but first sent
Federigo da Bozzole to treat with the party who held it. Full of
enthusiasm and courage, the young men refused all terms, and Bozzole
left them, enraged at their obstinacy and their personal ill-treatment
of himself. Guicciardini perceived the dangers that threatened his
country. It was an easy task for the duke of Urbino to attack the palace
of government, to destroy it and all those within; but an act of
violence and bloodshed was to be avoided. Guicciardini hastened forward
to meet Bozzole as he left the palace, and represented to him briefly
how displeasing such a contest would be to the pope, and how detrimental
to the confederates; and how much better it would be to calm, instead of
exasperating, the mind of the duke of Urbino. Bozzole yielded, and gave
hope to the duke that quiet might be restored without recourse being had
to arms; pacific means were in consequence resorted to, and the
insurgents induced to quit the palace. Guicciardini relates this
circumstance and his interference with pride, in the belief that he had
done his country as well as the pope good service, but he adds, that he
got no thanks from either side; the Medici party accusing him of
preferring the lives and safety of the citizens to the firm
establishment of that family; while the other party declared that he had
exaggerated their difficulties, and caused them needlessly to yield
their advantages.

It had been well for the fame of Guicciardini, if he had submitted to
the blame of his contemporaries, and secured the approbation of
posterity, by adhering to a line of conduct so impartial and patriotic.
Although the fall of the Medici was suspended for a short time on this
occasion, the taking of Rome decided their expulsion. When the duke of
Urbino went southward to deliver the pope, besieged in the Castel Sant'
Angelo, the Florentines seized the opportunity to drive out the Medici,
and to restore the freedom of their government. The wars carried on by
Clement VII. had weighed heavily on the republic, since he drew from it
his chief resources; the people were thus exasperated against his rule,
and now that they possessed the power, displayed their hatred of his
family by many acts of outrage. To have served them was to share their
disgrace, and the odium with which they were regarded. It has been
related how Machiavelli, republican as he was, and personally attached
to many of the leaders of the popular party, was unable to overcome the
prejudice excited by his having entered the service of the Medici.
Guicciardini was visited by more open marks of the dislike of the new
leaders; and he was the more angry because he had displayed a wish to
join them. He neither loved nor esteemed Clement; whom he represents as
timid; avaricious, and ungracious. He regarded his imprisonment by the
imperialists with very lukewarm interest, and even raised soldiers for
the defence of Florence: but these demonstrations did not avail to
acquire for him the confidence of his countrymen, and he was forced to
fly the town during a popular tumult. Hence seems to spring his hatred
of free institutions, and his subsequent conduct in aiding in the
destruction of the liberties of his country. From this time he entered
with all the zeal of personal resentment into the cause of the Medici.
His name has thus received a taint never to be effaced. He became the
abettor of tyrants, the oppressor of his fellow citizens; and that
equity and firmness which he before exercised; by establishing order in
the districts over which he presided, were changed to the persecution of
the martyrs of liberty.[33] It is impossible to slur over this portion
of his life as he does himself. For it is remarkable that the only
events recorded in his history, which are narrated in a slovenly and
confused manner, are those in which he took a principal share,--the
second restoration of the Medici, and the final overthrow of the
liberties of Florence.

When a reconciliation had been patched up between Charles V. and Clement
VII., the force of their united arms was turned against Florence. The
republic was headed by gallant spirits, who, seeing their last hope of
freedom in a successful resistance, exerted every nerve to defend
themselves. They were willing to suffer any extremity, rather than
submit to a slavery which must crush for ever the proud independence and
free institutions of their native city. Guicciardini had been named by
the pope, governor of Bologna, and took no part in the war against his
country; but he is accused of participating in the iniquitous
proceedings which followed the surrender of the city. The pope acted
with the utmost treachery. He granted generous terms; but when in
possession, held a mock assembly of the people, keeping off, by means of
the troops he introduced, all the citizens, except those prepared to
receive law at his hands. He thus, as it were, obtained a legal decree,
which changed the form of government, and denounced its late leaders.
Executions and confiscations became the order of the day; the chief
power was placed in the hands of Vettori, Guicciardini, and two others,
and their conduct entailed on them the execration of their fellow
citizens.

So zealous did Guicciardini show himself, that the pope entrusted him
with the office of reforming and restricting the list of candidates, who
were selected to be members of government, and he displayed his prudence
and sagacity for the reigning family at the expense of the lives and
liberties of the most virtuous among his fellow citizens. Under his
auspices, the office of gonfaloniere, which had subsisted for 250 years,
was abolished, and Alessandro de' Medici was named duke, which title was
to descend in perpetuity to his successors. This miserable man was the
son of a negro woman, and regarded as the offspring of Lorenzo, the son
of Piero de' Medici: but it was more probable that he owed his existence
to Clement VII.; at least the latter claimed the honour of paternity.
His disgraceful birth stamped him with contempt; his profligacy and
cruelty acquired the hatred of the people over whom he ruled.

Guicciardini endeavoured to restrain him in the indulgence of his vices,
but without avail. He was now wholly devoted to his service. When
Clement VII. died, his successor wished him to continue governor of
Bologna, but he refused. While the see was vacant, he had yielded to the
entreaties of the senators, and remained to prevent popular
disturbances. They promised him every assistance to maintain his
authority; but his enemies took occasion to display their disrespect.
Geronimo Pepoli, and others, who some years before had retired from
Bologna in distaste, took this occasion to return, accompanied by armed
followers and public bandits. Guicciardini's haughty spirit was in arms
against the insult. Among the followers of Pepoli were two outlaws under
sentence of death; these he caused to be seized, led to prison, and put
to death. Pepoli manifested the utmost indignation, and was only
restrained by the authority of the senators from giving public token of
his resentment. When the new pope was elected, and another governor
appointed, Guicciardini prepared to quit the city. Pepoli threatened to
attack him on his departure; but he, undismayed, set out at noon-day,
accompanied only by a few attendants on horseback. His road led him past
the palace of the Pepoli, nor would he diverge from it on this account,
but passed under their windows with a firm and intrepid countenance, and
was permitted to pursue his way unmolested.

He soon after displayed this energy and firmness of character in a very
bad cause. The Florentines, unable any longer to endure the tyranny and
vices of duke Alexander, appealed to Charles V., whom they regarded as
lord paramount of their state. The emperor summoned Alexander to Naples,
where he then was, to answer the charges made against him. He obeyed:
but the emperor was so incensed that he began to fear the result, and
was on the point of retreating, had not Guicciardini exhorted him to
remain. He drew up a defence for him, and by a judicious distribution of
bribes, succeeded in obtaining his acquittal; and Florence was again
subjected to his yoke.

Two years after, Alexander was murdered by Lorenzino de' Medici, who
considered that he had a better right to be considered the head of the
family. But this act, undertaken without the participation of any
accomplice, was not followed by the results that might have been
anticipated. Lorenzino, frightened by his very success, fled the city,
and his cousin Cosmo was raised to the supreme power, and afterwards
named grand duke of Tuscany. Guicciardini assisted materially in his
elevation, and hoped to be real chief of the state, while the other held
the nominal rank. But Cosmo was of a crafty, cold, and ungrateful
disposition, and treated his benefactor with such neglect, that he
withdrew himself from public life, and retired to his country seat at
Montici, in the neighbourhood of Florence.

From this time he occupied himself wholly in the composition of his
history. It is a fine monument of his genius and industry. It commences
with the invasion of Italy by Charles VIII., and goes down to the
exaltation of Cosmo. The fault attributed to him as an author is
prolixity, and to this he must plead guilty. He dwells with the most
tiresome and earnest minuteness on the most trivial incidents; and the
taking of an insignificant castle, followed by no important results, is
attended by the same diffuseness and exactitude of detail as events of
the greatest magnitude. But no historian surpasses Guicciardini when the
subject is worthy of his pen. His animated descriptions of battles, the
chances of war, and conduct of princes and leaders; his delineations of
character, and masterly views of the course of events, all claim the
highest admiration. The orations, which he intersperses, have been
cavilled at, but they are eloquent, full of dignified exhortation, or
sagacious reasoning. His account of the rise and formation of the
temporal power of the popes excited great censure in catholic countries;
and throughout he is accused of showing himself the enemy of the Roman
church. It is true, that the pages of no other historian afford such
convincing proofs of the pernicious effects resulting from the union of
spiritual supremacy and temporal possessions. His powerful character of
the infamous pope Borgia; his description of the fiery vehemence of
Julius II.; his unveiling of the faults of Leo X., and the exposure he
makes of the mistakes and weakness of Clement VII., present the very men
and times to our eyes, and form as it were a school in which to study
the philosophy of history. We perceive no partiality till the last few
pages, which record the downfall of the republic of Florence. His
language is, in the eyes of Italian critics, nearly pure; it is
forcible, without being concise; and the clearness and majesty of the
expressions in his best passages carry the reader along with him.

Guicciardini was solicited by pope Paul III. to leave his retreat, and
to enter again on public life, but he refused. The disappointment of his
ambitious views on the exaltation of Cosmo, and the duke's ingratitude,
struck him to the heart. He did not live to complete his history, and
died on the 27th of May, 1540, in the fifty-eighth year of his age. He
expressly ordered that his funeral should be unattended by any pomp; and
his directions were so strictly followed, that for some time no stone
even commemorated the spot of his sepulture.

Little is known of his private life. His letters have all perished,
except a few addressed to Machiavelli. They are lively in their style,
and very friendly. He had no son, and seven daughters, and wrote to the
secretary to ask his advice in settling them in marriage. Machiavelli
advised his applying to the pope for a dowry; counselling him by all
means to marry the eldest well, as the others would follow her example;
and he quotes a passage from Dante, referring to a duke of Provence,
"who had three daughters and each a queen. And the cause of this thing,
was Romeo, a poor wandering man," who had advised the duke to be
unsparing in his dowry to his eldest daughter, so to command a splendid
alliance, as the best means to advance her sisters also. He gave her
half his duchy, and she married the king of France. Guicciardini in
reply says, "You have set me on ransacking Romagna for a copy of Dante,
and at last I have found one." But he was too high-spirited to apply for
a gift from the pope.

Guicciardini was tall and of commanding aspect; rather squarely made,
and not handsome; but robust, and with an animated, intelligent
countenance. He was ambitious, and even haughty, so that he could endure
neither contradiction nor advice. Prudence, industry, sagacity, and a
penetrating understanding, recommended him to his employers; and he was
frequently entrusted with carrying on and correcting the correspondence
of the pope and other princes.

The last six books of his history are considered unfinished. No portion
of it was published till some years after his death, and then the
passages considered injurious to papacy were omitted. A complete edition
was first printed at Basle; but, even in this, the objectionable
passages appeared under the disguise of Latin. His first idea had been
to write only memoirs of his own life; and it was by the advice of
Nardi, it is said, that he enlarged his plan into a history of Italy
during his own times.


[Footnote 32: It was a habit among the Florentines to keep memoranda of
the principal events of their lives, which they called Ricordi. The date
of the birth of Guicciardini has been disputed, but it is ascertained
from a MS. book of his ricordi, or records, which Manni cites. He thus
writes concerning himself:--"I record that I, Francesco di Piero
Guicciardini, now doctor of civil and canon law, was born on the 6th
March, 1482, at ten o'clock. I was baptised Francesco, from Francesco de
Nerli, my maternal grandfather, and Tommaso, out of respect for St.
Thomas Aquinas, on whose festival I was born. Messer Marsiglio Ficino
held me at the baptismal font, who was the greatest platonic philosopher
then existing in the world, and by Giovanni Canacci and Piero del Nero,
both philosophers also."]

[Footnote 33: See a clever pamphlet, entitled "Saggio sulla Vita e sulle
Opere di Francesco Guicciardini," by Rosini, a professor of the
University of Pisa.]




VITTORIA COLONNA

1490-1547.


It would be giving a very faint idea of the state of Italian literature,
or even of the lives led by the learned men of those times, if all
mention were omitted of the women who distinguished themselves in
literature. No slur was cast by the Italians on feminine
accomplishments. Where abstruse learning was a fashion among men, they
were glad to find in their friends of the other sex, minds educated to
share their pursuits and applaud their success. In those days learning
was a sort of wealth; men got as much as they could, and women, of
course, were led to acquire a portion of such a valuable possession.

The list of women who aspired to literary fame in Italy is very long.
Even in Petrarch's time, the daughter of a professor of Bologna, gave
lectures in the university behind a veil, which has been supposed was
used to hide her beauty, and which at least is a beautiful trait of
modesty, where a young girl was willing to impart her knowledge to the
studious, but shrunk from meeting the public gaze. The mother of Lorenzo
de' Medici is celebrated for her sacred poems, and her patronage of
literature. Ippolita Sforza, daughter of the duke Francesco, and married
to Alfonso II., king of Naples, was learned in Greek and many other
languages. A manuscript copy of a translation of Tully's _de Senectute_
is preserved of hers at Rome, and marked as having been written in her
youth; and two of her Latin orations are to be seen in the Ambrosian
Library at Milan. Alessandra Scala, to whom Politian was attached, wrote
Greek verses, which have been printed, appended to the Latin poetry of
her learned lover. There was an Isotta of Padua, whose letters are
models of elegance, and who composed various poems of merit. The noble
house of Este boasted of a learned princess. Bianca d'Este has been
celebrated by one of the Strozzi in Latin verses; he speaks of her Greek
and Latin compositions with great praise. Damigella Torcila, we are
told, was numbered among the most distinguished women of her time. She
was profoundly versed in the learned languages, particularly in Greek;
she was an admirable musician, and as beautiful as she was wise.
Cassandra Fedele, however, excelled all her sex in her acquirements. She
was of a noble family, originally of Milan; born at Venice in 1465: she
was, by her father's desire, instructed in all the abstruse
studies--Greek, Latin, philosophy, and music--with such success, that
even in girlhood she was the admiration of all the learned men of the
age. There is a letter from Politian to her, which praises her Latin
letters, not only for their cleverness and elegance of style, but "for
the girlish and maiden simplicity" which adorned them. "I have read
also," he says, "your learned and eloquent oration, which is harmonious,
dignified, and full of talent. I am told that you are versed in
philosophy and dialectics, that you entangle others by the most serious
difficulties, and make all plain yourself with admirable ease; and while
every one loads you with praise, you are gentle and humble." This kind
of knowledge would not suit these days: but those were times when men
tried to puzzle themselves by scholastic learning, and when the noble
Pico della Mirandola took pleasure in disputing on nine hundred
questions. Isabella of Spain, Louis XII. of France, and pope Leo X. all
warmly solicited Cassandra to take up her abode at their several courts.
She showed willingness to accept the queen's invitation; but the
Venetian republic set so high a value upon her, that they would not
permit her to leave their state. She married Mapelli, a physician, who
was sent to Candia by the republic, and Cassandra accompanied him. She
became a widow late in life, and lived to extreme old age. She was
elected when ninety years old to be the superior of a religious house in
Venice; and died at the age of one hundred and two.

This list might easily be much enlarged; but we have no space for
further dilation; and therefore turn from names less illustrious, to
Vittoria Colonna, the woman of all others who conferred, by her virtues,
talents, and beauty, honour on her sex.

Vittoria Colonna was the daughter of Fabrizio Colonna, grand constable
of the kingdom of Naples, and of Anna di Montefeltro, daughter of
Frederic duke of Urbino. She was born at Marino, a castle belonging to
her family, about the year 1490. At the infantine age of four she was
betrothed to Ferdinando Francesco d'Avolos, marquess of Pescara, who
was not older than his baby bride. She was educated with the most
sedulous care, and was sought in marriage by various princes--but that
fidelity of disposition which was her beautiful characteristic through
life, prevented her from breaking her contract with her young lover.
They were married at the age of seventeen. He competed with her in
talents and accomplishments. They loved each other with the utmost
tenderness, and lived for four years succeeding to their marriage, in
solitude, in the island of Ischia, where Pescara had a palace.

But this happiness was of short duration; at the time when Julius II.
leagued all Italy against Louis XII., the marquess of Pescara joined the
army of the emperor. Vittoria was full of chivalric feelings; her
enthusiasm, as well as her tenderness, were gratified by the occupation
of embroidering banners for her hero, who, at the early age of
one-and-twenty, was made general of cavalry at the battle of Ravenna.
That disastrous day was adverse to him. He was taken prisoner and sent
to Milan, where he remained a year, and wrote a dialogue on love,
addressed to his wife, in a dedication in which he laments that he can
no longer visit her as he was used, whenever the duties of his station
permitted his absence. As a kind of answer to this testimony of his
affection, Vittoria designed an emblem--Cupid within a circle, formed
by a serpent, with the motto "_Quem peperit virtus, prudentia servet
amorem_"--"May prudence preserve the love, which originated in virtue."

After the French were driven from Italy, that unhappy country enjoyed a
short interval of peace, interrupted by the invasion of Francis I.
Pescara was present at the battle of Pavia, and distinguished himself by
his intrepidity, and mainly contributed to the success of the emperor's
arms. He was not rewarded as he deserved, and the opposite or French
party thought that his consequent discontent afforded an opening for a
reconciliation with them. Geronimo Morone was employed by them to seduce
him from his fidelity to Charles V. He was offered the kingdom of Naples
as a reward, and every argument was used that might have most
weight;--the honour he would acquire by driving the barbarous nations
from Italy, and the favours which the pope and other princes would
shower upon him. These were, however, but specious reasonings. Pescara
lent too ready an ear to them; but Vittoria at once detected their
fallacy, and the disgrace that would befall her husband if he abandoned
his imperial master. She wrote him a letter full of earnest persuasion
to refuse the dazzling offers of Morone. She spoke of the glory acquired
by fidelity and unblemished honour, as far outweighing any that a crown
could bestow, saying, that for herself, she desired to be called the
wife, not of a king, but of that great and glorious soldier, whose
valour and generosity of soul had vanquished the greatest kings.
Pescara's conduct on this occasion is wholly unworthy of the precepts of
his admirable wife. He continued faithful to the emperor, but acted the
base part of a spy and informer: by his means Morone's designs were
betrayed, and he was thrown into prison. There is no doubt that the
high-minded Vittoria continued to the last entirely ignorant of this
ignoble action; and praised her husband for having listened to her
exhortations, and rejected a crown.

But while the marquess was acting so as to cast an eternal stigma on his
honour, death was at hand to terminate every ambitious project. His many
wounds, and the fatigues he had endured during the long wars, had so
shaken his health, that neither his good constitution nor the skill of
physicians were any longer able to afford relief. While preparing to
die, he desired to take leave of his wife, and sent for her to join him
at Milan; but when he found that he should not survive long enough to
see her, he sent for his cousin, the marchese del Vasto, and recommended
Vittoria to him with the warmest affection. Vittoria, on hearing of her
husband's illness, had left Naples to join him. She passed through Rome,
where she was received with the greatest honours, but on arriving at
Viterbo, she received intelligence of Pescara's death: her grief caused
her to forget her religious resignation and fortitude; its excess
overwhelmed her with tears and the bitterest anguish.

From that time this illustrious lady never ceased to spend every faculty
of her soul in lamenting her lost husband. They had been married
seventeen years, but had no child; she gave herself up entirely to
sorrow; and her faithful heart, incapable of a second attachment to
replace one which had begun with her life, cherished only the image of
her past happiness, and the hope of its renewal in another life. Her
active mind could not repose tranquilly on its misery; she continued to
cultivate it, so to render it more worthy of Pescara, and she exercised
and amused it by the many sonnets she wrote in his honour. An Italian
author has named her second only to Petrarch. Her verses are full of
tenderness, of absorbing passion, of truth and life. They fail in poetic
fancy; and yet, so much does the reader sympathise in the intense and
fond sorrows of this extraordinary woman, that none can criticise, while
all are touched by her laments. The best poem in her volume has been
attributed to Ariosto, I do not know on what authority; but if written
by her, has that elegance of style and concentration of expression,
which characterises true poetry. It begins with the affecting
exclamation, "I am indeed her you loved! Behold how bitter and eating
grief has changed me!--Scarcely could you recognise me by my voice. On
your departure, that charm which you called beauty, and of which I was
proud, since it was dear to you, left my cheeks, my eyes, my hair!--Yet,
ah! how can I live, when I remember that the impious tomb and envious
dust contaminates and destroys thy dear and beautiful limbs!" These
verses may in their original be very justly compared in pathos and grace
to Petrarch:--


Io sono, io son ben dessa! or vedi come
M' ha cangiata il dolor fiero ed atroce
Ch' a fatica la voce
Può di me dar la conoscenza vera.
Lassa! ch' al tuo partir partì veloce
Dalle guancie, dagli occhi, e dalle chiome
Questa a cui davi come
Tu di beltade, ed io n' andava altera,
Che me 'l credea, perchè in tal pregio t' era.
* * * * *
Com' è ch' io viva, quando mi rimembra,
Ch' empio sepolcro, e invidiosa polve
Contamina e dissolve
La delicate alabastrine membra?


For seven years she gave up her whole heart to sorrow. Her relations,
thinking her too young at the age of thirty-five to continue unmarried,
pressed her to accept one of the many offers of marriage which she
received. But, wedded as all her thoughts had been since her earliest
infancy to one object, she felt unconquerably averse to any second
nuptials. She lived in retirement either at Ischia or Naples, dedicating
herself wholly to memory. Her active mind, refusing to find comfort in
any sublunary blessing, had recourse to religion for consolation. She
now employed herself in writing sacred poetry, and her enthusiastic
disposition led her to project a pilgrimage to Jerusalem; but the
marchese del Vasto opposed her putting it into execution.

She now left Naples on a tour to the north of Italy, and visited Lucca
and Ferrara. She afterwards took up her residence at Rome, and became
the intimate friend of the cardinals Bembo, Contarini, and Pole, and
various distinguished prelates. A love of yet greater retirement induced
her a few years after to retreat to a convent at Orvieto; from whence
she removed, after a short time, to the convent of Santa Caterina, at
Viterbo. Our countryman, cardinal Pole, resided in this town, and an
intimate friendship subsisted between him and Vittoria. There is a
resemblance in their characters that renders this intercourse
interesting; they were both singleminded, enthusiastic, and noble.
Vittoria added feminine tenderness to these qualities, while religious
fervour formed a bond of sympathy between them. The companions of
cardinal Pole were Flaminio and Pietro Carnescecchi: the latter having
afterwards become a protestant, doubts have been raised concerning the
orthodoxy of Vittoria; but there is every evidence that she never fell
off from her adherence to the catholic church.

A short time before her death she returned to Rome, and took up her
abode in the Palazzo Cesarini; where she died, in the year 1547, at the
age of fifty-seven. During her last moments her attached friend, Michael
Angelo, stood beside her. He was considerably her junior, and looked up
to her as something superior to human nature, and entitled to his most
fervent admiration. He has written many sonnets in her praise; and there
is extant a letter, in which he states how he stood beside her lifeless
remains, and kissed her cold hand, lamenting afterwards that the
overwhelming grief and awe of the moment, had prevented him from
pressing her lips for the first and last time.

This almost divine woman was held by her contemporaries in enthusiastic
veneration. Her name is always accompanied by glowing praises and
expressions of heartfelt respect. Ariosto joined with all Italy in
celebrating her virtues and talents, and has addressed several stanzas
to her in his Orlando Furioso.




GUARINI

1537-1612.


Battista Guarani was descended from a family illustrious for its
literary merits. One of his ancestors, known as Guarino of Verona, was
conspicuous among the restorers of learning of the fifteenth century;
and his descendants emulated his labours. Battista was born at Ferrara,
in 1537. His mother was Orsolina, the daughter of count Baldassare
Machiavelli. We are nearly in ignorance with regard to any of the
circumstances of the early youth of Guarini. He studied at Pisa and
Padua, and visited Rome while very young. On his return to Ferrara, he
gave lectures on Aristotle in the university. He was made professor of
belles lettres, and was already known to his friends as a poet. He
married young, Taddea Bendedei, of a noble Ferrarese family.

But Guarini was not contented with a life of literary labour, and
preferred the distinction of a court to poetic fame. There is a letter
of his, dated 1565, which gives token that he had already made the
paltry ambition of serving a prince the aim of his life. This letter is
written to a friend at Pisa, who had asked his advice on the subject of
whether he should enter on the service of his sovereign. Guarini
establishes the doctrine, that in private life a man is as far from
tranquillity as in public; he is equally pursued by envy and pride,
without the compensation he might find in courtly favour. In his own
person he acted on these ideas, and reaped the usual harvest of
disappointment and mortification. His wishes were, however, at first
gratified. He was sent, by the duke Alfonso, to Venice, about this very
time, to congratulate the new doge, Pietro Loredano; and, his oration
being printed, he acquired a reputation for talent and learning. He was
for some time resident at Turin, as ambassador to Emanuel Philibert,
duke of Savoy. In 1573, he was sent to Rome, to pay homage to Gregory
XIII., who had succeeded to Pius V. He arrived in the evening, after a
hasty journey, and passed the night in composing his speech, which he
delivered the next morning in consistory. Two years afterwards, the duke
sent him to Poland, to congratulate Henry of Valois on his accession to
the throne. On his return, he was named counsellor and secretary of
state. After an interval, he was a second time sent to Poland, on a
mission of the highest importance. Henry of Valois succeeded to the
crown of France, and Alfonso was desirous of being chosen in his room to
the Polish throne. Guarini was sent to negotiate his election. He felt
the weight and responsibility of his errand fall heavily on him. His
letter to his wife during the journey has been several times quoted, but
it is too interesting to be omitted here. It is dated from Warsaw,
November 25. 1575, and is as follows:--

"This which you read is my letter and not my letter; it is mine, for I
dictate it,--it is not mine, because I do not write it. But you must not
so much grieve that I have not a hand to write with, as rejoice that I
have a tongue to recount that which, from vain compassion or negligence,
another might conceal. I know you must have been complaining of my
dilatoriness in writing, but I shall find no difficulty in excusing
myself, since the cause has been worse than the effect; and, instead of
lamenting my silence, you may thank God that you at last hear from me. I
set out, as you know, more in the fashion of a courier than an
ambassador; and it would have been well if my body alone had laboured,
while my mind reposed. But the hand used by day to whip on my horses,
was put to service at night in turning over papers. Thus, formerly, I
arrived at Rome in the evening by post, and the next day presented
myself at the consistory. Nature gave way under the double fatigue of
body and mind, especially as I travelled by the road that passes through
Saravalle and Ampez, which is inexpressibly disagreeable and
incommodious, as well from the rudeness of the inhabitants as the state
of the country; the want of horses, scarcity of provisions, and, in
short, of every necessary of life; so that, on my arrival at Hala, I
fell ill of a fever, in spite of which I hurried on to Vienna. I leave
you to imagine what I suffered from fever, weariness, and thirst: unable
to procure remedies or medical treatment; cast upon bad lodgings, bad
food, and into beds that smothered me with their feathers; devoid of all
those conveniences and comforts which are necessary to the sick. My
malady increased, and my strength grew less; and every thing, except
wine, became distasteful to me, so that I had small hopes of life, and
turned with disgust even from the few days I expected to live. While I
navigated the Danube, we were nearly overwhelmed by a rapid and
dangerous stream, and should not have escaped had not the sailors made
use of the assistance of the strong and active men of the country, who
are accustomed to contend with this danger, being always on the spot to
give aid, and who, by force of oars, stemmed the torrent. But for their
help no vessel could escape wreck; and the place is worthy of the
infamous reputation it has gained, and the name of the Pass of Death,
which is bestowed on it. The boldest travellers fear the passage, and
disembark, and proceed by land, till the boat has got beyond the danger,
for it is really frightful; but I was so ill, that I had lost all sense
of peril, and remained on board with the brave boatmen,--I will not say
whether from stupidity or intrepidity,--yet I may say that I was
intrepid, since I felt no fear when but two steps from certain death.

"I arrived at last at Vienna, where a physician, without considering the
symptoms of my illness, gave me a medicine that poisoned me, and my
malady grew worse. You will all say that I ought to have stopped short,
and taken care of my life: my common sense, my sufferings, the failure
of strength, and a natural wish to live, love for my fellow creatures
and my family, suggested the same counsel; but my honour forced me to
proceed, and obliged me, since I was at the head of this embassy, and as
the whole weight of so important a negotiation rested on me, to prefer
the interests of my prince to my own safety; and I acted so that I might
testify to all Poland my fidelity to my sovereign by my death, rather
than, by preserving my life, give room to the suspicion that I feigned
an illness so to break my promises, the fulfilment of which was expected
with anxiety; which false notion among those selfish and distrustful men
would at once have discredited our negotiation, and deprived our prince
of the crown which we are endeavouring to place on his head.

"It is impossible to form an idea of what I suffered during a journey of
more than 600 miles, from Vienna to Warsaw; dragged and torn along,
rather than conveyed, by my incommodious carriage. I do not know how I
survived: beset by continual fever, without rest, or food, or remedies;
enduring excessive cold and infinite inconveniences, while I passed
through an uninhabited country, where I often found it better to remain
for the night in my uncomfortable carriage, than to expose myself to the
stench of the inns or, rather, stables, where the dog, the cat, the
fowls, the geese, the pigs, the calves, and sometimes squalling
children, kept me awake all night. The difficulties of the journey were
increased also by the robbers, who, during this interregnum, infest the
country, robbing whatever they can; so that it was impossible to proceed
without a strong escort; and, although I took infinite pains to avoid
them, I had twice nearly fallen into their hands, escaping rather
through Divine Providence than human foresight. I arrived at last at
Warsaw, a great deal more dead than alive; nor have I gained any relief
to my sufferings by being here, except that I am no longer in movement,
nor dragged along by my carriage; for the rest, I enjoy no repose,
either night or day. My fever is now my least evil; the objects by which
I am surrounded are worse: the place, the season, the food, the drink,
the medicines, the physicians, the servants, the inquietude of my mind,
and other troubles, are greater ills than the fever, which would soon
quit me but for these annoyances. Indeed, I have not yet discovered
whether my sleepless nights arise from illness, or the constant noise
around me. Imagine a whole nation assembled in a little village, and I
lodged in the middle of it. There is no spot above, below, to the right
nor to the left,--there is no room by day or by night, that is not full
of noise and disturbance. No particular time is set apart for business
here; they are always at work, because they are always drinking, and
without wine all transactions grow cold. When business is ended visits
begin, and when these are over, drums, trumpets, cannons, shouts, cries,
quarrels, and every other species of tumult, fill up the interval till I
am distracted. If I suffered these things for the glory and love of God,
it would be called a martyrdom; and yet, to render service without hope
of reward, almost deserves the same name. God knows what is to become of
me! I should feel that my life was no longer in danger if I could take
any care of myself. Prepare your mind for every evil. It is the part of
a silly woman to lament a husband who is content to die. Let others
honour my memory with their tears; do you honour it by your courage. I
recommend our children to you; for if I die, you must be a father as
well as a mother to them. Arm yourself with reflection and manly
fortitude; guarding them from those who have reduced me to this state,
and teaching them to imitate their father in any thing rather than in
his fortunes."[34]

This letter presents a lively picture of Guarini's disposition;--his
energy in struggling with evils; his ambition to please his prince, and
his fears lest he should not be fitly recompensed; the fervour of
imagination, which magnified ill fortune, and which, while it gave him
strength to meet it, yet doubled its power over him. Although he failed
in the object of the embassy, yet, after all the dangers to which he had
exposed himself, he felt that he had sacrificed his life to his prince,
and yet that he should go unrewarded. He was not deceived; but he was
incapable of meeting the fulfilment of his anticipations with any
patience or fortitude.

His mind was naturally turned to poetry; but he pretended to disdain
such occupation. On the subject of his Pastor Fido, he writes to a
friend:--"This is the work of one who does not profess the poetic art,
but writes for his own amusement, as a recreation from more serious
studies; and who would willingly burn his works when they do not appear
good to good judges." The fame and favour which Tasso was enjoying made
him depreciate himself, since he could not excel his rival. Tasso and he
had been friends for many years; they quarrelled at this time, but the
discord did not result from any literary contest, but from rivalship in
the favour of a lady. They both loved the countess of Scandiano. Tasso
wrote a sonnet, accusing Guarini of lightness and inconstancy in his
passion, as well as of the greater sin of boasting of his triumphs over
the ladies of his love. Guarini replied, with bitterness, in another
sonnet, accusing his rival of uttering falsehoods that mirrored his own
faithlessness, which enabled him to nourish love for two objects at the
same time.[35] This contention broke off their friendship; but Guarini
was no ungenerous enemy; he possessed a loyal and noble spirit, and
never did any thing to injure his unfortunate rival. On the contrary,
some years after, when the Gerusalemme Liberata of Tasso was about to be
published in a very defective and erroneous state, he took great pains
to furnish a correct copy.

[Sidenote: 1582.
Ætat.
45.]

After struggling with his discontents at court for some time, he
requested his dismissal from the duke; and retired to his villa in the
Polesine of Rovigo, named La Guarina, having been bestowed upon an
ancestor by a former duke of Ferrara. He now congratulated himself on
having escaped from the tempests of public life into port; yet his
disappointments, and the duke's ingratitude, rankled at his heart, and
overflowed upon paper, even when the subject immediately before him was
not in accord with the pervading feeling of his mind. He occupied
himself at La Guarina by writing the Pastor Fido; and he makes one of
the characters of the pastoral complain of wrongs similar to his own.
Carino, narrating his story, says,--


How I forsook
Elis and Pisa after, and betook
Myself to Argos and Mycene, where
An earthly God I worshipped, with what there
I suffered in that hard captivity,
Would be too long for thee to hear, for me
Too sad to utter. Only thus much know;--
I lost my labour, and in sand did sow:
I writ, wept, sung; hot and cold fits I had;
I rid, I stood, I bore, now sad, now glad,
Now high, now low, now in esteem, now scorn'd;
And as the Delphic iron, which is turned
Now to heroic, now to mechanic use,
I fear'd no danger--did no pains refuse;
Was all things--and was nothing; changed my hair,
Condition, custom, thoughts, and life--but ne'er
Could change my fortune. Then I knew at last,
And panted after my sweet freedom past.
So, flying smoky Argos, and the great
Storms that attend on greatness, my retreat
I made to Pisa--my thought's quiet port.
*     *     *     *     *
Who would have dreamed 'midst plenty to grow poor?
Or to be less, by toiling to be more?
I thought, by how much more in prince's courts
Men did excel in titles and supports,
So much the more obliging they would be,
The best enamel of nobility.
But now the contrary by proofs I've seen:
Courtiers in name, and courteous in their mien
They are; but in their actions I could spy
Not the least transient spark of courtesy.
People, in show smooth as the calmed waves,
Yet cruel as the ocean when it raves:
Men in appearance only did I find,
Love in the face, but malice in the mind:
With a straight look and tortuous heart, and least
Fidelity where greatest was protest.
That which elsewhere is virtue, is vice there:
Plain truth, fair dealing, love unfeign'd, sincere
Compassion, faith inviolable, and
An innocence both of the heart and hand,
They count the folly of a soul that's vile
And poor,--a vanity worthy their smile.
To cheat, to lie, deceit and theft to use,
And under show of pity to abuse;
To rise upon the ruins of their brothers,
And seek their own by robbing praise from others,
The virtues are of that perfidious race.
No worth, no valour, no respect of place,
Of age, or law--bridle of modesty,
No tie of love, or blood, nor memory
Of good received; nothing's so venerable,
Sacred, or just, that is inviolable
By that vast thirst of riches, and desire
Unquenchable of still ascending higher.
Now I, not fearing, since I meant not ill,
And in court-craft not having any skill,
Wearing my thoughts charactered on my brow,
And a glass window in my heart--judge thou
How open and how fair a mark my heart
Lay to their envy's unsuspected dart.

FANSHAWE's _Trans. of Pastor Fido._[36]


The Pastor Fido is the principal monument of Guarini's poetic genius.
Despite his pretended carelessness, he was animated by the spirit of
poetry, and emulation spurred him on to surpass the Aminta of Tasso; and
he took pains even to compose whole passages in opposition, and manifest
rivalship, of that drama. A pastoral presents in its very nature a
thousand difficulties. It has for its subject the passions in their
primitive simplicity, and the manners are deprived of all factitious
refinement; and yet the most imaginative thoughts and the softest and
noblest sentiments are to flow from the lips of the untaught shepherds
and shepherdesses. Thus its foundation being purely ideal, our chief
pleasure must be derived from the poetry in which it is clothed. Guarini
endeavoured to overcome the want of interest inherent in this species of
composition, by a plot more complex than that usually adopted. A portion
of this is sufficiently clumsy, and the bad character of the piece, the
coquette Corisca, is managed with very little art or probability. There
is much spirit and beauty, however, in the final developement,--in the
discovery that the priest makes that he is about to sacrifice his own
son, and the joy occasioned by the conviction suddenly flashing on his
mind, that the oracle, on which the whole depends, is happily fulfilled.
Still the chief charm of the Pastor Fido is derived from its poetry; the
simplicity and clearness of its diction, the sweetness and tenderness of
the sentiments, and the vivacity and passion that animate the whole. No
doubt he was satisfied with the result of his labours, and found pride
in communicating it. While affecting to despise his poetic productions,
their genuine merit, and his own vanity, which was great, caused him to
collect with pleasure the applauses which his Pastor Fido naturally
acquired for him. He read it at the court of the duke Ferrante di
Gonzaga, to a society composed of courtiers, ladies, and eminent men.
[Sidenote: 1585.
Ætat.
48.]
It was acted at Turin on occasion of the festivals to celebrate the
nuptials of Charles Emanuel, prince of Savoy, with Catherine, daughter
of Philip II., king of Spain. The drama excited the greatest admiration;
and Guarini was looked on henceforth with justice, as second only to
Tasso among the poets of the age.

But he was not fortunate enough to be allowed to dedicate his whole time
and thoughts to poetry; and he might bring forward his own experience in
proof of his assertion, that private life is not more exempt than
public, from cares and the influence of evil passions. He was
perpetually plunged in lawsuits, his first being against his father, who
had married a second time, it was said out of spite, and disputed his
just inheritance. He had a family of eight children to provide for; and
unrewarded by his prince, he found himself, after struggling for
fourteen years to advance himself at court, overwhelmed by debt and
embarrassment. His time and attention were taken up by exertions to
extricate himself, and to settle his affairs; while his warm, impatient
disposition ill endured the delays and disappointments, and the contact
with selfish or dishonest men, which are the necessary concomitants of
pecuniary difficulties.

[Sidenote: 1586.
Ætat.
49.]

Perhaps these annoyances rendered him less unwilling to accept the
invitation, or rather to obey the commands, of the duke of Ferrara, and
to return to his post at his court. Alfonso, perceiving the esteem in
which he was held by other princes, with his usual selfishness resolved
to appropriate the services of a man, which others also were desirous of
obtaining: he made him secretary of state, and sent him on missions to
Umbria and Milan. His stay, however, was short: very soon after his
children had advanced to manhood, those dissensions occurred between
them and him, which form a painful portion of Guarini's life. It is
difficult to say who was most to blame. The poet's temper was impetuous,
and he perhaps showed himself tyrannical in his domestic circle, at the
same time that his nature was without doubt, on most occasions, generous
and artless. His son had married a lady named Virginia Palmiroli, and
continued, as is so usual in Italy, to reside with his wife under the
paternal roof. But this arrangement became, it is conjectured, from the
pride and imperiousness of the father, quite intolerable; and the young
pair left the house, and instituted a suit at law to obtain such a
provision as would enable them to live in independence. The suit was
decided against Guarini; and his indignation, and assertion that his
defeat was occasioned by the partiality of the duke towards his son,
seem to evince that he had more justice on his side than we are enabled
to discover. However this may be, he was so angry at what he considered
the injustice of the sentence pronounced against him, that he again
requested permission to retire from Alfonso's court. The duke granted
his request, but not without such tokens of displeasure, as induced
Guarini to leave Ferrara privately and in haste. He betook himself to
the court of Savoy, where the prince willingly took him into his
service; but the poet found that the change of masters benefited him
little, and he was so constantly employed, that he had not even time to
write a letter. Alfonso also set on foot some intrigues against him,
disliking that any dependant of his should find protection elsewhere.
[Sidenote: 1590.
Ætat.
53.]
His tranquillity being thus disturbed, he hastily quitted Savoy and took
up his abode at Padua. He here lost his wife, whom he affectionately
names in his letters as the better part of himself; and, by the
separation of his eldest son, and the absence of his daughters, who were
either married or had places in the palaces of various princesses of
Italy, his family circle was reduced to one son of ten years of age,
whom he calls "the hope of his house, and the consolation in his
solitude." This change gave birth to new projects in his restless mind.
"This sudden alteration and transformation of my life," he writes to the
cardinal Gonzaga, in a letter dated from Padua, the 20th of November,
1591, "appears to me to be brought about by the will of God, who thus
calls me to a new vocation. I am not so old nor so weak as to be unfit
to make use of those talents which God has bestowed on me; and it
appears to me that I act ill in spending without profit those years,
which by the course of nature I could turn to the advantage of my
family, and of my young son, whose inclination for the priesthood I am
desirous of assisting; and I would willingly spend the remnant of my
days at Rome, if I could obtain such preferment, as would enable me to
proceed honourably in the advancement of my moderate expectations." This
idea, however, was but the offspring of disappointed hopes, and it
vanished when other prospects were opened to him; yet these were
variable and uncertain. His life, both from the ingratitude of Alfonso
and his own restlessness, was destined to be passed stormily; discontent
and distrust had taken root in his mind, and existence wore a gloomy
aspect.

At length Alfonso died, and this circumstance, and the death of a
daughter, assassinated by a jealous husband, caused him to quit Ferrara,
and to establish himself at Florence, where he was honourably received
by the grand duke Ferdinand. Here doubtless he might have remained in
peace, but for the irascibility of his temper, the indignation he felt
when his views were thwarted, and his tendency to consider himself an
ill-used man. His younger son, whom he mentions in the letter quoted
above with so much interest, was placed at Pisa for the sake of his
education, where he contracted an imprudent marriage with a young,
beautiful, and dowerless widow. Guarini was transported by rage: he
accused the duke of abetting his son in this act of disobedience, and
indulged in implacable anger against the youth himself, to whom he
refused any assistance, when reduced to the most necessitous
circumstances. Guarini exalted the paternal authority, and exacted
filial obedience, in a manner that displayed more pride than affection.
Now in his old age, he was at variance with nearly all his children; his
violent expressions is a proof that he suffered; but his heart did not
relent nor open towards them, even when death snatched them from him;
and it is impossible to sympathise in passions, which thus centred and
ended in himself.

On leaving Florence, he visited Urbino; but, dissatisfied with his
reception, he retired to Ferrara. The citizens deputed him to Rome to
congratulate Paul Usur on his being created pope. It was on this
occasion that cardinal Bellarmino reproached him for having done more
harm to the Christian world by his Pastor Fido, than Luther and Calvin
by their heresies--a singular denunciation--since, though the softness
and tenderness of love, which pervades the poem, may tend to enervate;
yet the fidelity, the devotion, and purity of sentiment, exhibited in
the actions of the chief personages, certainly do not lay it open to
excessive censure. Guarini retorted by a witty reply, which the respect
paid to the cardinal by the historians, has not permitted to be
transmitted to us.

[Sidenote: 1608.
Ætat.
71.]

This was the last public service of Guarini. A few years after he was
invited to be present at the nuptials of Francesco Gonzaga and
Marguerite of Savoy, during which a comedy of his was represented with
great splendour. Chiabrera wrote the interludes, and the architect
Viamini arranged the scenery and decorations.

The last years of his life were taken up by the lawsuits, which so
strangely chequered his career. He hired a lodging at Venice, where many
of his causes were decided, as near as possible to the courts, and
frequently visited that city to attend the proceedings; and he made a
last journey to Rome at the time that two suits were decided in his
favour. On his return to Venice he was seized by a fever, of which he
died, after an illness of seventeen days, on the 7th of October, 1612,
at the age of seventy-five.


[Footnote 34: There is another letter of Guarini, dated from Cracovy,
during his first visit to Poland, written with less personal feeling,
and greater toleration:--"I have viewed the climate and manners of this
country," he writes, "with infinite pleasure; mitigating the annoyances
resulting from unusual things, by the enjoyment of unusual sights. The
country and its inhabitants are certainly much less barbarous than is
generally supposed; and in my opinion there would be no fault to be
found, if the former was gifted with wine, and if the latter abstained
from it. But I am afraid that my words will scarcely find credit with
you, prejudiced as you are by the accounts given by the French who have
been here. Yet I am sure you would agree with me, if you ever visited
the country. The kingdom is extensive, rich, powerful, united, abundant,
and peopled by a brave population. The senators display great talent
during peace--the cavaliers valour in war: their aim is glory--their
support liberty. The form of the government is mixed, like that of
Sparta, but better than that. For the kingdom is neither oppressed by
the tyranny of one, nor the insolence of a few, nor the baseness of the
many; but having mingled the best parts of all three modes of
government, one has resulted, in which the kingly power cannot intrench
upon liberty, nor licence endanger the monarchy. The nobles cannot
oppress the people, nor the people injure the nobles. Valour holds the
first rank, nobility the second, riches the third; and every one,
however lowly born, may nourish the expectation of rising by merit to
the highest honours. How I wish that you had an opportunity of visiting
it: I am certain that you would be highly pleased. A journey to France
is more fatiguing; and after arriving in Poland, I, to whom an excursion
to Rome used to appeal an arduous undertaking, begin to think that
travelling is a natural state for every man."]

[Footnote 35: Abate Serassi, Vita di Tasso.]

[Footnote 36: Come poi per veder Argo e Micene
Lasciassi Elide e Pisa, e quivi fussi
Adorator di deità terrena,
Con tutto quel che in servitù soffersi,
Troppo nojosa istoria a te l' udirlo,
A me dolente il raccontarlo fora.
Si dirò sol, che perdei l' opra, e il frutto.
Scrissi, piansi, cantai, arsi, gelai,
Corsi, stetti, sostenni, or tristo, or lieto,
Or alto, or basso; or vilipeso, or caro.
E come il ferro Delfico; stromento
Or d'impresa sublime, or d' opra vile,
Non temei risco e non schivai fatica:
Tutto fei, nulla fui: per cangiar loco,
Stato, vita, pensier, costumi e pelo,
Mai non cangiai fortuna: alfin conobbi,
E sospirai la libertà primiera.
E dopo tanti strazi, Argo lasciando
E le grandezze di miseria piene,
Tornai di Pisa ai riposati alberghi.
*     *     *     *     *
Ma chi creduto avria di venir meno
Tra le grandezze, e impoverir nell' oro?
Io mi pensai che ne' reali alberghi
Fossero tanto più le genti umane,
Quant' esse han più di tutto quel dovizia
Ond' ha l' umanità si nobil fregio.
Ma vi trovai tutto il contrario, Uranio,
Gente di nome e di parlar cortese,
Ma d'opre scarsa e di pietà nemica:
Gente placida in vista e mansueta,
Ma più del cupo mar tumida e fera;
Gente sol d' apparenza, in cui se miri
Viso di carità, mente d'invidia
Poi trovi, e in dritto sguardo animo bieco,
E min or fede allor, che più lusinga.
Quel ch' altrove è virtù, quivi è difetto.
Dir vero, oprar non torto, amar non finto,
Pietà sincera, inviolabil fede,
E di core e di man vita innocente;
Stiman d' animo vii, di basso ingegno
Sciocchezza e vanità degna di riso.
L'ingannare, il mentir, la frode, il furto
E la rapina, di pietà vestita,
Cescer col danno e precipizio altrui,
E far a sè, dell' altrui biasmo onore,
Son le virtù di quella gente infida:
Non merto altrui, non valor, non riverenza,
Nè d' età, nè di grado, nè di legge,
Non freno di vergogna, non rispetto
Nè d' amor nè di sangue, non memoria
Di ricevuto ben, nè finalmente,
Cosa si venerabile, o si santa
O si giusta esser può, che a quella vasta
Cupidigia d' onori, a quella ingorda
Fame d' avere, inviolabil sia.
Or io, che incauto e di lor arti ignaro
Sempre mi vissi, e portai scritto in fronte
Il mio pensiero, e disvelato il core,
Tu puoi pensar se a non sospetti strali
D'invida gente fui scoperto segno.

_Pastor Fido_, atto V. scena 1.]




TORQUATO TASSO

1544-1595.


"Tu che ne vai in Pindo,
Ivi pende mia cetra ad un cipresso,
Salutala in inio nome, e dille poi
Ch' io son dagl' anni e da fortuna oppresso."

"Thou, who to Pindus tak'st thy way,
Where hangs my harp upon the cypress tree,
Salute it in my name, and say,
I am bow'd down with years and misery."


These few lines, which, in the simple and beautiful original, show what
a burthen of thought and power of feeling may be compressed within the
smallest compass that language will allow, were written by Torquato
Tasso, during his second confinement as a lunatic in the hospital of St.
Anne, at Ferrara, by the duke of Alfonso, his patron and his oppressor.
They were written when all Europe was listening to the voice of his
song, but heard not that of his complaint; in the meridian of his glory
as a poet, and in the depth of his humiliation as a man. A spectacle
more deplorable and repulsive could hardly be presented to the eye of
humanity; nor a fame more enviable and attractive be contemplated by
young "spirits of finer mould," to tempt them to hazard all perils of
such suffering for the acquisition of such renown. This fragment--a
specimen of thousands of fancies, no doubt, equally exquisite and
affecting, which were continually passing through the darkened chamber
of his mind, more dreary than the gloom of his prison-house--has been
quoted at the commencement of this memoir, as letting the reader at once
into the whole mystery of the poet's life, by a single flash of his
genius affording a glance at his afflictions. What these were, a long
and melancholy tale must unfold; what their effect was may be painfully
conceived, when we recollect that he was scarcely turned upon _forty_,
at the time that he sends the message to his forlorn harp in the woods
of Pindus, that he is "oppressed with _years_ and ill fortune,"--"dagl'
_anni_ e da fortuna oppresso."

If ever man was born a poet, it might be said so of Tasso; while his
whole manner of life, not less than its remarkable vicissitudes,
exemplified the poetic character, as it has been idealised in our minds
from infancy, by the impressions left upon them, both from fabling
traditions and authentic records, concerning these privileged, but on
the whole (perhaps) unhappy, beings. The price of greatness must be
paid, in labour or suffering, by every man who would distinguish himself
in any way above his fellow-creatures; and the poet (_no_ more, it may
be, though apparently _much_ more, than the prince, the warrior, the
statesman, or the philosopher,) must endure hardships, mental and
personal, in proportion to his enjoyments, and be humbled in the same
degree that he is exalted above the common lot. Among any ten names,
which might be mentioned as having secured an imperishable pre-eminence
beyond the probability of revolution, in the same walk of polite
literature, Tasso's undoubtedly would be one. At what an expense it was
acquired, we proceed to show in a train of events, almost as romantic,
and a thousand times more touching, than any thing in his own
diversified fictions. He was a poet in every thing and at all times,
from infancy (if we may believe his biographers) till he died in extreme
old age (if we measure his life by his own testimony above quoted), in
his fifty-second year! Smiles and tears, rapture and agony, hope and
despondency, a palace and a dungeon, were the alternations frequently
crossing in the course of one who was the companion of princes, the
delight of ladies, the admiration of the world,--an outcast, a wanderer,
clothed in rags and asking bread, or the lonely tenant of a maniac's
cell. Such was he, and such were the changes of his state.

Torquato was the son of Bernardo Tasso, himself a poet of first rank in
his generation, and who has left works, both in prose and verse, to
which posterity is yet willing to give honour; but which suffer more
eclipse by proximity to the surpassing splendour of his son's, than
might have been their lot had he appeared by himself, the single one of
his race, who had proved how hard, and yet how possible, it is to climb


"The steep where Fame's proud temple shines afar."


Bernardo was the descendant of an honourable line of ancestors,--one of
whom, nearly two centuries before him, had been a benefactor to the
public, by first introducing the method of epistolary intercourse
through the medium of posts; and, leaving to his children the reputation
which he had acquired in the conduct of these, they became his
successors, not only in establishments for that purpose in their own
country, but some of them in lands beyond the Alps. It is said that
noble alliances were formed by various branches of the Tasso family, in
Spain and in Flanders, while others became sovereign princes in Germany,
that menagerie for potentates of all genera and species, from the
two-headed eagle of Austria to the wren of * * * *. It would be
invidious to set down one out of a hundred who might contend for the
honour of filling up the blank, as the least of the little among the
great. But, whatever were the hereditary glories of a name,--drawn like
a golden chain out of the darkness of the past, and connected, as that
of the obscurest peasant in a civilised country may be presumed to have
been, with all the varieties of rank, all the gradations of intellect,
and all the changes of good and evil fortune,--of all the links which
formed that chain, those of Bernardo and Torquato were and have remained
the most illustrious, though the consecutive or collateral series has
been continued to the present day, when the representatives are still
found at Bergamo.

Bernardo, who was born in 1493, being left an orphan in early youth,
with two dependent sisters to provide for out of a very slender
patrimony, was compelled to quarter himself on the patronage of sundry
princes and prelates, who, according to the fashion of the times--some
from parade, and others from attachment to the noble arts,--loved to
have men of genius and letters in their train. Many of these, indeed,
were kept, not only to adorn their courts and swell their pomp, but were
employed as secretaries and counsellors, as well as occasionally
entrusted with important embassies, which, both in war and peace, were
frequent between the commonwealths and principalities into which Italy
was divided, and by whose conflicting interests, or under the malignant
influence of whose petty intrigues (the rank growth of such a state of
society), it was continually more or less distracted. Bernardo was,
therefore, from the pressure of circumstances, a restless and homeless
man through the principal part of his life, serving the great without
serving himself, for precarious bread; and at once pursuing fortune and
fame, in the vain hope of being at length--and at length--and at length
rewarded for his fidelity to his masters with the former, and leaving an
inheritance of the latter, which should as much exalt his family by
distinction in literature, as others had aggrandised it by the
acquirement of riches and alliances with rank, at home and abroad.

At the age of forty-one, after a youth of liberal study, sanguine
anticipation, and cherished but ill-directed love for a lady of great
beauty and no less celebrity, having been praised by Ariosto--in the
unsuccessful pursuit of which he compensated himself and delighted his
countrymen with the blandishments of poetry,--he was at length appointed
secretary to Ferrante Sanseverino, prince of Salerno. Him Bernardo
accompanied through many strange vicissitudes of prosperity and
misfortune, in the court and in the battle-field; till, at the end of a
few years, he shared so grievously, yet so magnanimously, in the ruin of
his patron, that, the latter being involved in a conspiracy against the
vice-regal government of Naples, and compelled to flee into France, the
poet followed him thither at the sacrifice of his small estate, and an
income which had just raised him above want. Before this ebbing in the
tide of his affairs, which, "taken at the flood" (had that not been
arrested in its advance), he might reasonably have expected would have
led on to fortune, he had married a lady of Naples, named Portia Rossi,
an heiress in expectance, and of great personal and mental
accomplishments. This was the golden age of Bernardo's life. After the
revelry of fancy and romance which had carried him away during his
former passion, wherein his heart had little share, the love of
affection endeared him to his home, and he felt the transition like one
who exclaims, "How sweet is daylight and fresh air!" after the midnight
splendour of the ball-room, with the dream-like fascinations of music,
dancing, and spectacle, which vanish as effectually as fairy palaces
conjured up in the wilderness, and leave the heart desolate.

While Bernardo was at Naples, he commenced a poem of the romantic class
on the adventures of Amadis de Gaul, or "Amadigi," as the work is
entitled. This he projected upon the regular plan of a fable, having a
beginning, middle, and end; but he was not of sufficient authority to
establish, by his example, a classical form of epic, though his more
successful and more gifted son seems to have borrowed the idea of doing
that from him. When he read the first cantos of this performance, as
originally constructed, he observed, that though the presence chamber of
the court of Salerno was well filled at first with eager and expecting
auditors, before he had done nearly all of them had disappeared. From
this he concluded (not suspecting any deficiency of power in himself),
that the unity of action prescribed by the severer critics was, in its
very nature, not agreeable to nature in art, knowing that he had
punctiliously observed all the rules of the latter. This failure,
enforced by the persuasions of his friends, and the commands of the
prince, induced him to remodel what he had written, and elaborate the
remainder after the precedents of Pulci, Bojardo, and Ariosto. The work
was extended to a hundred cantos, and, when published, was so well
received, that the author had cause to congratulate himself on having
met the public taste and gratified it; but it was the public taste of
the day only, for his poem passed away with the fashion of it, and is
now remembered among "things that were," while the three productions of
his afore-named predecessors still keep their graduated rank of ascent,
and find readers in every age, notwithstanding all the defects and
excesses that may be charged upon them. Bernardo's failed; less,
perhaps, because of its inferiority, than because it did not display the
proportionate superiority which the others had each in turn manifested
over all its respective forerunners.

It was while Bernardo resided at Sorrento, a city in the vicinity of
Naples, where he occupied a palace overlooking the sea, happy in his
home, and prosperous, or rather promising himself prosperity in his
fortune, the prince of Salerno having released him from all burdensome
duties in his service, that his son Torquato, the second of that name
(the first having died young), was born, on the 11th of March, 1544.
Sorrento is here put down as the birth-place of the poet, among other
cities contending for that honour, like those seven


----"that strove for Homer dead,
Through which the living Homer begg'd his bread."

_Ath. I._ 384.


For of Tasso, in the sequel, a sarcasm as bitter might be recorded. A
daughter, elder than either of the boys, was at this time growing up
under the eyes of their parents. A letter of the father's (previous to
_our_ Torquato's birth) to his sister Afra, who had retired into a
convent, gives a lively glimpse of Bernardo's affectionate and domestic
character.[37] "My young daughter is very beautiful, and affords me
great hopes that she will lead a virtuous and honourable life. My infant
son"--Torquato the first--"is before God our Creator, and prays for your
salvation. My Portia is seven months gone with child; whether a son or a
daughter, it shall be supremely dear to me; only may God, who gives it
me, grant that it may be born with his fear; pray together with the holy
nuns that the Almighty may preserve the mother, who in this world is my
highest joy." It is ludicrous, yet affecting, to observe what little
circumstances are eagerly laid hold upon after death, respecting the
personal history of men who, during their lives, were neglected in their
hardest trials, or oppressed in their helplessness by those who were
bound to protect and foster them. The very hour of Tasso's birth, as
well as the place, has been contested against his own authority: he says
that it was four o'clock in the morning; Serassi, that it was mid-day.
"He ought to have been born at Naples," says Manso, "though he happened
first to appear at Sorrento." It may be settled that he was a native of
Italy rather than of any place where he may first have seen the light,
in a country throughout which he was a stranger and a pilgrim all his
days. Indeed, he ought to have been born on the sea; so little claim, on
the ground of paternal kindness shown to him, had any city in the
peninsula to the glory of his birth.

Scarcely had he been welcomed into the world under auspices so cheering
as those recently mentioned, than the fortunes of his family took an
adverse turn. Bernardo was summoned away from the delightful retirement
of Sorrento, to join his patron in the war which had just broken out
between the emperor Charles V. and Francis I., and in which the prince
brilliantly distinguished himself. Meanwhile, if we are to believe his
nursery traditions, the little Torquato was giving, even from his
cradle, proofs of the spirit that was in him, scarcely less
extraordinary than if, like Hercules, he had strangled serpents, or like
another poet of old, attracted bees to his lips, whether to gather or to
deposit sweetness there we need not stay to enquire. Manso, his latest
and most munificent patron, his first and most encomiastic biographer,
(whose memoir, like Boccaccio's of Dante, reads more like romance than
reality in many passages, and no where more than in this instance,)
says, that the child, even during his first year, gave evidence of the
divinity of his genius. For scarcely had he attained his sixth month,
when, contrary to the usage of children, he began not only to let loose
his tongue (or to prattle _a snodar la lingua_), but even to speak
outright, and that in such a manner that he was never known to lisp (or
clip) his syllables, as all other infants do, but formed his words
complete, and gave them perfect utterance. If this be true, his
marvellous faculty of speech, like the produce of a premature spring,
must have suffered an early blight: for he himself records that, in
speaking, he was little favoured by nature, having an unconquerable
impediment of tongue; whence he preferred to communicate his thoughts
rather in writing than by the audible voice, when he meant to win
attention or produce impression. His own testimony is so far at variance
with the assertion of his friend Manso respecting his early fluency,
that he appeals for confirmation of the fact that he is a stammerer
(probably to no very inconvenient degree) to some of his correspondents.
But we are told, on the same authority, that the infant was equally
precocious in the faculties of the mind; that he could reason, explain
his thoughts, and answer questions with surprising intelligence.
Moreover, to crown the climax, it is said that he seldom cried, and
never laughed; the only exception, it may be presumed, of a healthy
child since the world began; but that he was grave, dignified, and sage,
and announced by his behaviour that he was destined for some great
design.

On the return of Bernardo from the army, he enjoyed a brief prolongation
of his domestic quiet at Sorrento, during which all that a romantic
father and a passionately tender mother could do to awaken, cherish, and
confirm the early intimations of transcendent intellect in their darling
son, was employed; and such discipline, by its natural effect, no doubt,
coloured and characterised their son's mind, in the sequel, to the end
of life. In one of Bernardo's letters to Portia, during his late
absence, he says, that, while he leaves to her the delicate task to
adorn their daughter Cornelia with every virtue and accomplishment which
becomes a maiden, he intends himself to train up their young Torquato
for his more arduous station in society, when he should be of proper
age. This purpose was never realised.

In 1552, the prince of Salerno and his adherents being declared rebels,
Bernardo, as one of the most attached of his friends, was included in
the proscription: his estate was confiscated, and an income of 900 scudi
lost; leaving him utterly destitute of resources, with the exception of
a few valuable trinkets, and the hope of some time recovering his wife's
dowry--a hope which outlived himself, and which he bequeathed as a
perpetual plague of expectation and disappointment to his son, who, as
will be seen, obtained a decree to have it, against his mother's
brothers, nearly at his own last hour. Bernardo being thus driven into
exile, his wife remained with the children at Naples, in very narrow
circumstances, though amongst wealthy relatives, who seem always to have
treated her and her offspring with unnatural hard-heartedness. Torquato,
meanwhile, under her superintendence, was making progress in the general
rudiments of knowledge; but especially in the acquisition of languages,
in rhetoric, and in poetry, proportioned to the promise of his earlier
years. His principal tutor was one Angeluzzo, at a college of the
Jesuits, recently established in that city. So eager and intent was he
in quest of knowledge (such as lay within his reach), that his mother,
so far from having to urge or bribe him onward, was obliged, for his
health's sake, to restrain him. Early and late he was at his books; and
on the winter's mornings he was sent from his home to the school with a
lantern and servant to conduct him. At seven years of age he was already
a considerable proficient in the Greek and Latin tongues, and had begun
to exercise himself in oral eloquence and written composition; but no
genuine specimens of either of these have been preserved.

The following beautiful and touching lines, in which he alludes to the
worst period of his life,--his separation from his mother, when called
away from Naples to join his father at Rome,--have been absurdly
attributed to him as actually penned at this date. Hoole, and even Hunt,
two of his modern translators, have fallen into this error; whereas a
moment's consideration would convince any man, who understood the
difference between adult poetry and puerile attempts at rhyming, that
such verses, at such an age, (nine years!) would have been sufficiently
remarkable to justify belief in the fables of his babyhood, when he sat
talking pretty unbroken Italian on his mother's knee, before he was
twelve months old.

The passage occurs in a figurative canzonet on the river Metauso, but
addressed to the duke of Urbino, imploring refuge and protection in his
adversity. Though left unfinished, the fragment is acknowledged to be
one of the most exquisitely wrought of all the author's lyrics:--


"Me dal sen della madre empia Fortuna
Pargoletto divelse: ah! di que' baci,
Ch' ella bagnò di lagrime dolenti,
Con sospir mi rimembra, e degli ardenti
Preghi, che sen portar l' aure fugaci,
Ch' io giunger non dovea più volto à volto
Fra quelle braccia accolto
Con nodi così stretti, e sì tenaci.
Lasso! e seguii con mal sicure piante,
Qual Ascanio, o Cammilla, il padre errante."


"Me, from a tender mother's breast,
Stern Fortune, while an infant, tore;
Ah! I remember how she press'd.
Press'd me, and kiss'd me, o'er and o'er,
Bathed with her tears, with doleful sighs,
Breathed for me many a fervent prayer,
Which, ere it reach'd the skies,
Was scatter'd by the passing air.

"For I was nevermore to meet
That parent face to face,
Clasp'd in her clear embrace,
With folds so strait, so binding and so sweet.
Alas! 't was mine thenceforth to roam
With ill-supporting feet,
And, like Ascanius o'er the trackless floods,
Or young Camilla, cast on wilds and woods,
Follow a wandering father without home."


These lines--breathing forth such grateful recollections of maternal
tenderness, watching, weeping, praying, over a most beloved and
affectionate child, from whom she was parting for ever, and who was
destined to be far greater than even she, in her fondest entrancement,
could have hoped--remind us of our own Cowper's filial reminiscences, in
"words that weep," translating "tears that speak," on receiving, at a
more distant period of a suffering life, his mother's picture: at sight
of which, for a while, he lived over again, with a thousand times more
intense delight, the scenes of infancy, renewed, like a vision of
pre-existence in some happier state than that which had intervened since
he had borne the burthen and heat of a long day of life consumed in
anguish of spirit, for which, on this side of the grave, he found no
solace, and beyond it, no hope for his bewildered mind; dark as Egypt
under the ninth plague in that quarter, though, in every other, light as
the land of Goshen. Between Tasso and Cowper there were many traits of
sad as well as noble resemblance--kindred genius, a kindred malady, and
kindred misfortunes; but not kindred alleviations: the advantage here
was on our countryman's side; but his disease lay deeper than that of
the former, and the symptoms, if not so violent after the first terrible
attack, were more inveterate; so that, contemplating the fate of the
glorious Italian under eclipse, and pitying him with a sympathy which no
man living but himself could feel, Cowper might have drawn the same
comparison between Tasso's case and his own, as he has done in those
heart-wringing verses (the last which he is recorded to have composed)
under the title of "The Castaway." These were founded upon a
circumstance mentioned in Anson's Voyage, of a sailor who fell overboard
in a storm, when the ship could not be stayed to rescue him, but who
followed in its wake, crying after it, and being heard by his
companions, while he


----"lived an hour
In ocean, self-upheld;
And ever, as the minutes flew,
Entreated help, or cried 'adieu.'"
* * * *
"At length he drank
The stifling wave, and then he sank."


The melancholy poet adds, in reference to himself, that


"Misery still delights to trace
Its semblance in another's case.
* * * *
No voice divine the storm allay'd,
No light propitious shone,
When snatch'd from all effectual aid,
_We_ perish'd, _each alone_;
_But I beneath a rougher sea_,
_And 'whelm'd in deeper gulfs than he._"


Both of Tasso's parents had early and deeply impressed upon his mind and
his affections veneration and love to God. In his tenth year the Jesuit
fathers, following up the religious instructions of this child of
promise according to their views of the Gospel, admitted him to the
sacrament; on which occasion, though he acknowledges, in one of his
epistles, that he could not enter into the mystery of "the real
presence," according to the Roman interpretation of the true and simple
scripture doctrine of "the _communion_ of the body and the blood of
Christ," yet, impressed with awe by the pomp of the spectacle, and
elevated almost to transport by sympathy of devotion with the
surrounding multitude, he received the symbol, according to his own
ingenuous account, with "a certain indescribable and unwonted
satisfaction." This circumstance deserves particular mention, because,
assuredly, by such a course of domestic and school discipline the boy
was trained up in what he understood to be genuine piety, and of which,
through after life, he became a zealous professor, however lax on some
other subjects his writings, and even his actions, may have been. In the
latter respect, however, he was countenanced by the licentious manners
of the age, and especially of that class of society, refined and exalted
as it was, in which his lot was cast, but in which he was rather
entertained as a guest than recognised as a member of the privileged
order. His father, in one of his letters to his mother, says, "It is of
the utmost importance to impress, with all your influence and authority,
upon the infantine mind the name, the love, and the fear of God, that
the child may learn to love and honour Him from whom he has received,
not life only, but all the benefits and mercies of providence and grace,
which can render man happy in this world, and blessed in that which is
to come." In the same letter he says, "I condemn those who beat their
children, not less than if they should dare to lay hands on the image of
God."

It was after the expatriated party to whom Bernardo belonged had planned
an attack upon Naples, by the combined fleets of France and Turkey,
which miscarried in a miserable piratical descent upon the neighbouring
coast, and a disgraceful re-embarkment, that Portia and her daughter
were received into a convent, and Torquato was sent to his father at
Rome; who, an exile, on a bed of sickness, and in deep poverty, was
solacing himself, amidst his misfortunes, with preparing a volume of his
Rime for the press, and unweariedly labouring to complete his _Amadigi._
In "the eternal city," young Tasso prosecuted his studies with
indefatigable assiduity, and having for companion a cousin of his own
name, Christofero Tasso, a lad of indolent habits and slow capacity. He,
by his example and influence, for a while happily stimulated the latter
to become a worthy competitor of himself; but he soon growing tired in
the course, Torquato left him, and every rival beside, far behind in
every learned and liberal accomplishment.

In 1556 Portia died, at Naples, never having seen her husband since his
original proscription. Her illness was so brief and so violent, that
Bernardo doubted whether it was poison or a broken heart that had cut
her off in the prime of her years,--most of which, however, had been so
melancholy, since her happiness first seemed consummated by her union
with the man of her choice, and in the children of their love, that
there needed no auxiliary, in this instance, for Nature to do her work
in the shape of death. Meanwhile Bernardo, not being permitted to return
to Naples, was compelled, by the stress of hard circumstances, to leave
his daughter in the hands of those whom he had but too much reason to
call her enemies, though the nearest of kin to her deceased mother.
These--probably from motives of rapacity, though political rancour may
have added its malignity to the cold venom of avarice--instituted a
process against young Torquato, to disinherit him, under a pretence
which a fiend incarnate (had such a wanderer from the abyss of lost
spirits been permitted to darken the earth with his shadow) might have
blushed to advance in a court of justice,--that, having followed his
miserable parent to Rome, the boy (at ten years of age!) had made
himself partaker of his father's imputed treason, and thereby
righteously exposed himself to the same penalties of exile and
confiscation. The issue of this iniquitous proceeding does not appear,
except it may be gathered from the fact, that the uncles contrived to
withhold Torquato's portion of his mother's dowry from him till the last
year of his life: and, further to secure the control, at least, of the
property by themselves, they married her daughter Cornelia, who, at
fifteen years, had grown up into a beauty, to a gentleman of Sorrento,
of narrow fortune, but honourable birth, in spite of the protestations
of her father, whose ambition had destined her for a higher and more
wealthy alliance; his hopes and his plans being even a day's march
beyond his power of overtaking them by performance. There is extant a
letter written on this occasion by Torquato (probably at the dictation
of his father) to Signora Vittoria Colonna, in which the lad bitterly
complains against the cruelty of his uncles in forcing this match upon
his sister; and implores her interference to prevent the entailment of
poverty and disgrace upon the young Cornelia, by such a sacrifice of her
person and property to the mercenary views of her relatives. "It is
hard," says the reputed writer, "to lose one's fortune; but the
degradation of blood is much harder to bear. My poor old father has only
us two; and, since fortune has robbed him of his property, and of a wife
whom he loved as his own soul, suffer not rapacity to deprive him of his
beloved daughter, in whose bosom he hoped to finish tranquilly the few
last years of his old age. We have no friends at Naples; our relations
are our enemies, and, on account of the circumstances of my father's
situation, every one fears to take us by the hand." These stern but
tender sentiments, wrung in the agony of heart-sickness from the father,
were written, not only by the hand of the son upon the paper of the
epistle, but on his own heart, and became identified with his personal
feelings through life. Though he never suffered the escutcheon of his
family to be blemished by a humbling connection, yet he paid dearly,
both in his affections and in his pride, to preserve it; and, if the
tradition of his love for a princess of the house of Este be founded in
truth, he must have felt that he was himself, in that case, playing the
part of "some poor gentleman," whose alliance would be a degradation of
the most ancient blood of Italy. Both the father and the son, in the
sequel, were reconciled--first for Cornelia's sake, and afterwards for
his own--to her husband; who proved a worthy and kind consort, with whom
she lived happily, though not long, and by whom she had several
children.

In a letter addressed by Bernardo to his daughter, while she was yet a
girl, occurs the following affecting day-dreams of the comforts of old
age which he hoped to realise in her filial attentions. After exhorting
her to mind her lessons, and promising in due time to provide a husband
worthy of her, with whom she should live near himself, he thus fondly
adverts to that closing scene of a troubled life, to which many a
sufferer like him, to the last moment, looked on as a forlorn
hope--forlorn, yet inexpressibly soothing, and cherished even in the
heart of despair:--"Sweet and tranquil to me will be old age, when I
shall see (as I hope it may be the will of God) myself perpetuated in
your little ones, with my very features impictured on their
countenances. Death will then appear to me less terrible, when,
beholding you in honour and in peace, enjoying the love of your husband,
and the delights derived from the affections of your children, you shall
close with pale hands these eyes of mine. And surely it is due to a dear
father to receive the last kisses, the last tears, and every other pious
and tender office, from a dutiful and loving daughter."

Fresh commotions in Italy rendering Rome an unsafe sojourn for the
homeless Bernardo, he removed his son and his nephew to Bergamo, and
fled himself to Ravenna, with two shirts and his _Amadigi_ yet
uncompleted; as destitute as his contemporary Camoëns, when he escaped
from shipwreck with his _Lusiad_ in one hand, and with the other
buffeting the waves--thus saving at once his life and his immortality!
On as troubled a sea, by land, as any breadth of water between Lisbon
and Canton, not excepting that round the Cape of Storms, Bernardo was
tossed to and fro throughout Italy; and continued to the last as poor,
yet as sanguine, as the only genius that Portugal had hitherto produced,
and proved itself unworthy to give birth to another by its neglect, if
not its ingratitude and inhumanity, to that one. But here a gleam of
sunshine broke upon Bernardo, amidst the darkness of his flight from
Rome. The duke of Urbino invited him to Pesaro, and afforded him a
welcome but temporary asylum there from the persecution of his enemies,
and the pressure of indigence--a retreat, indeed, which he himself
acknowledged was such as might give inspiration to any poet, and where
lie, himself, in quiet and amidst that comfort to which he had lately
been a stranger, might complete his long poem.

Torquato for a little time was pleasantly situated at Bergamo, in the
family of his cousin and fellow-student, where, being a boy of
exceedingly prepossessing appearance, amiable disposition, and
manifestly brilliant talents, he was much noticed and even caressed by
many of the principal persons in the neighbourhood. Bernardo, however,
anxious to have him under his own eye and direction, soon reclaimed him.
At Pesaro, Torquato, as might be expected, won attention from the whole
circle of his father's acquaintance; and the duke d'Urbino himself was
so delighted with his graceful modesty and rare accomplishments, that he
introduced him to his own son as a suitable companion in his studies and
his pleasures. The young noble of fortune at once became attached to the
young noble of genius, and a friendship, so natural to kindred minds
early associated--the dawn of affection preceding the day-star of
passion in the order of Providence--speedily sprang up, and amidst all
the splendour of station which through life distinguished the one, and
the sufferings by adversity which were the subsequent lot of the other,
was never forsworn or forgotten by either. And well was the lustre, so
transiently shed by the prince, in the court of his father, upon the
humble son of the exile there, imperishably reflected upon himself, in
after years, even from the dungeons of Ferrara, by the glory of the
author of "Gerusalemme Liberata."

Bernardo having at length put the finishing stroke to his _Amadigi_,
looked to the munificence of the king of France and the prince of
Salerno for the means of printing it. In these reliances he was
disappointed; and it appears that his patron, the prince, was himself so
impoverished, that the pension to the poet of 300 crowns (a poor
compensation for all his services and sacrifices) was about this time
withdrawn. So utterly perished were Bernardo's resources, in this
extremity, that, according to his own lamentable statement, had it not
been for the bounty of the duke d'Urbino, he must have been almost
reduced to the necessity of begging bread for himself and his son. The
duke liberally supplied him, not with bread only for himself and his
son, but presented him with 300 ducats, to which were added a hundred
gold crowns by the cardinal de Tournon. Hereupon he repaired to Venice,
to publish his work. Being received with great respect by the literary
characters of that city, then eminent for noble arts as well as
victorious arms and prosperous commerce, he was adopted by them, and
made secretary to their academy. To this office was annexed a salary so
considerable, that, with his wonted improvidence, he immediately
established himself in a handsome house, sumptuously furnished, and
adorned with what seems to have been his delight, rich tapestry, the
poetry of the needle and the shuttle, and which at best is but to
painting what painting itself sometimes is to nature — a copy
reminding the spectator of an original, of which one of the greatest
merits of the imitation is the difficulty overcome in achieving it.

Bernardo's vicissitudes would present a touching but melancholy contrast
to those of Gil Blas of Santillane, if written in a style of seriousness
and sympathy with what is most sacred in suffering, and trying in hope
deferred, equal to the pungent humour and heartless indifference to what
is "virtuosest, discreetest, best," in the characteristic adventures of
that gay footman of fortune. But such transitions as both Bernardo and
Torquato experienced, strange as they seem to us, were events of common
occurrence, arising out of the state of society in the petty
principalities and commonwealths of Italy in the middle ages, and long
after the revival of learning, when those who followed the profession of
letters were too often dependent for the means of subsistence upon the
precarious patronage of haughty nobles and ostentatious ecclesiastics.
The part which Torquato had to bear in the diversities of circumstance,
scene, and company, into which he was thrown with his parent, was too
well calculated to cherish and confirm all his natural aspirings; while
those patrician sentiments, which had been instilled into him from his
cradle, amidst poverty, ignominy, and all the wretchedness of ephemeral
favour, ever sustained in him a lofty self-esteem, on the ground of
honourable birth, the consciousness of innate genius, and the pride of
acquired learning, to which had been carefully added those gentlemanly
accomplishments which rendered him a fit companion for people of the
highest rank in an age of extraordinary display of personal conduct and
ceremonial bearing. Tasso, in addition to his peculiar advantages,
excelled in all these conventional ones, except in self-control--that
especially which degenerates into servility--for (though the most
exquisite flatterer in the world, as thousands of panegyrical verses
prove him to have been) he never learned the meaner, but more
profitable, art of being a court-minion.

While he was thus pursuing his studies with in defatigable application,
he was not less diligent in cultivating those talents, which had given
such extraordinary signs of power within him. It is stated that while,
for the latter purpose, he was reading with intense devotion the poets
both of old Italy and new, as well as the relics of the nobler bards of
ancient Greece, like most of his countrymen, (perhaps, from secret
nationality of feeling,) he preferred the Latins to these, and among the
Latins Virgil beyond every other bore the palm in his youthful
imagination. In fact he grew so enamoured of the graces and excellences
of the Æneid, that his own epic became just such a work as, it might be
presumed, Virgil himself would have composed in the same age, and under
the same influences, as Tasso lived; while, on the other hand, had their
births been exchanged, Tasso might have been the glory of the court of
Augustus, and flourished then in splendour amidst the greatest and most
intellectual society of men of talents that were ever contemporary,
instead of being an almoner, an exile, a prisoner, beholden for food and
raiment, in his best estate, to the bounty--or rather to the
parsimony--of "the Great Vulgar" of Italy in the sixteenth century,
whose names are more illustrious from having been connected with his,
than for any record of themselves or their ancestors, which could render
their families illustrious beyond the little boundaries of their
domains. This supposition, in reference to Virgil and Tasso, may be
deemed impertinent; hazardous it certainly is, and once would have been
deemed heretical by the idolaters of the Roman poet. Though this is not
precisely the place, yet, in a discursive memoir like the present, it
may be allowable, to remark upon a line of Boileau, which has done more
injury to the reputation of Tasso than all the splenetic criticisms of
Sperone, and the verbal persecutions of the Della Cruscans. Ridiculing
the bad taste of certain personages who haunt courts, and from their
rank and assurance are permitted to judge as foolishly as they please of
the merits of authors with impunity, he says (and in a note gives a
special instance of such aristocratic wrong-headness[38]) that these
will prefer "_à Malherbe, Théophile_," "Théophile to Malherbe,"--


"Et le clinquant du Tasse à tout l'or de Virgile:"

"And Tasso's tinsel to all Virgil's gold."


This flippant antithesis, which, from its sparkling ambiguity, might
itself be quoted as a specimen of sheer "tinsel" (_clinquant_), amounts
to no more than that there are "fools," as the satirist calls them, who
prefer what is _false_ in Tasso to what is _true_ in Virgil; but that
the whole, the half, or even a tenth of the "Gerusalemme Liberata," of
which he himself speaks elsewhere with sufficient commendation, is
composed of "_clinquant_," without a greatly overbalancing weight of
gold even in its worst parts, he has not dared to affirm, though by a
pitiful insinuation, not less unworthy of the author than unjust to the
object, he has had the left-handed luck to fix a stigma to that effect
upon the fair fame of one, in comparison with whose magnificent
creations of thought his own finely elaborated productions are but as
"French wire" to "solid bullion." The feeble confirmation of Boileau's
equivocal sentence, by the elegant but prejudiced Addison, is of little
weight. The critic, who, in tracing Milton's obligations to some of his
great forerunners, acknowledges that among these he might have included
Tasso, but that he does not deem him "a sufficient voucher," could be
but very imperfectly acquainted with the authority which he affected to
disparage, but which the poet of "Paradise Lost" held in very different
estimation. Try Boileau, when he attempts a strain of heroics, as in the
"Ode on the taking of Namur," or Addison, in his celebrated "Campaign,"
by any page that may be first opened in all Tasso's multifarious
compositions in verse, and the "white plume" on the crest of Louis XIV.,
which the court poet mistook for a star, and the destroying "angel,"
which the court critics of queen Anne's reign hailed as descending from
"the highest heaven of invention," and the feather metamorphosis, in the
first instance, will be pronounced a puerile and pedantic conceit; and
the "angel," in the second, a piece of commonplace machinery, which
scarcely escapes the charge of profaneness in its main attribute.
Marlborough, a mortal man, burning to avenge his country's wrongs, may
well be imagined as slaughtering, with terrible delight, the thousands
and tens of thousands of her enemies; but that an angel should be
"pleased" (as the cold and heartless phrase is) in executing judgments
upon unresisting victims of divine wrath (righteous as the vengeance may
be) is utterly inconceivable; nor can the poet shelter himself under the
doubtful interpretation of the context,--


"Pleased _the Almighty's orders to perform_,
Rides on the whirlwind and directs the storm,"--


because the first, last, and only impression upon the reader's mind will
be, that the destroyer is "pleased" with the _destruction_, though the
Almighty himself declares that "_He_ hath no pleasure in the death of
the wicked." Both these passages might have escaped carping criticism;
but, when Boileau and Addison mislead the public to believe that Tasso's
writings are "all tinsel," it is fair to show that their own are not
"all gold."[39]

Torquato's mind now feeling strength, and gaining confidence to
undertake things beyond his years, he diligently gave his days and
nights, in the intervals of severer exercises, to reading and meditating
upon the works of his great Italian predecessors, that he might form,
after their models, a style of verse and manner of composition which
should rival theirs, and yet be all his own. Unconsciously, it is
probable, at first, but gradually as he grew up, through an undefined
period, he conceived, and, before he reached the age of eighteen, had
executed, what Dr. Black calls "the most wonderful work that ever was
written by man," when the youth of the author, and the short time in
which it was composed--ten months, it is reported--are taken into the
account. The "Joan of Arc," by our illustrious countryman, Southey,
produced in a less compass of time, and at an age not much more advanced
than Tasso's, may fairly be put in competition with the "Rinaldo,"
without disparagement to either. Nothing connected with the existence of
man, in this mysterious world, at once living within and beyond himself,
exceeds, either in purity or intensity, the delight of youth when
framing poetry at first according to the extent of new-formed powers,
and anticipating poetry to come, when years shall have matured his
faculties, and his wings, after their first moulting, shall have
acquired full vigour of plume to bear him "with no middle flight" above
the Aonian mounts while he pursues


"Things unattempted yet in prose or rhyme."


Among real "curiosities of literature" there yet remain copies of Dante
and Petrarch, with marginal notes in Torquato's handwriting, which prove
with what microscopic minuteness he examined and studied the productions
of those masters of that language, to which he himself was destined to
give consummate grace as well as power of expression--the strength of
Dante, modified from the muscular proportions of Hercules to those of
the fine-limbed Apollo,--the delicacy of Petrarch veiled, like the
Medicean Venus, in the mantle of Minerva. It may here be noticed, that
Tasso was no more an expert penman than a fluent speaker; his
manuscripts, according to his own acknowledgment, being very
indifferently recommended either by the fashion of the letters, or the
correctness of the spelling. The numberless erasures, interpolations,
and new readings, with which many of his best works, preserved in the
library of the house of Este, are disfigured to the eye, are interesting
marks of that process of elaboration by which he slowly but as
effectually brought out all the hidden beauty of his thoughts, as though
they had been suddenly conceived and perfectly expressed in the ardour
of inspiration.

During their residence at Venice, Torquato was much employed by his
father in transcribing his own multitudinous poems and letters, as well
as in preparing for the press the enormous length of the "Amadigi." By
this exercise the son himself became daily more familiarised with the
means and artifices by which those who excel others in the productions
of their genius, form their peculiar style according to their peculiar
standard of intellect, and identify their whole cast of thinking with
their whole structure of language. To put a passage of an eloquent
author to the nicest test of _touch_ (if the expression may be allowed
for the intercourse of mind with mind, in the communication and
reception of ideas splendidly conceived and felicitously bodied forth by
the one, and by degrees only apprehended by the other,)--to put to the
nicest test of _touch_, as it were, any eloquent passage of poet or
orator, let the admirer copy it out at length, and he will find that the
progress of mind, hand, and eye, going all together, and through every
part, will give him the most distinct possible possession of the whole
in its full proportion, minutest details, and utmost effect.

But while thus the amanuensis of his father, Torquato was not less
assiduously cultivating his own talents, and meditating the composition
already alluded to, in which he was soon not only to rival the former,
but even while a boy, and upon the enchanted ground of romance itself,
to prove a greater magician than he. This the sudden and passionate
admiration with which his "Rinaldo" was hailed throughout Italy, and
beyond the Alps and Pyrenees, irreversibly established. The failure of
Bernardo's hopes, in the neglect with which both sovereign princes and
the reading public, after the first effervescence of applause, treated
his "Amadigi," was nearly contemporaneous with the first triumph of his
more fortunate son, who, so far as fame could gratify or reward his
literary labours, may be said to have succeeded in all that he
attempted, either in prose and verse, thenceforward, though some of his
performances had but an ephemeral popularity, being welcomed at first,
and afterwards formally honoured from the courtesy due to their author,
and the measure of kindred excellence by which they were all allied to
the happier offspring of his too prolific mind. Bernardo, after he found
that the stupendous monument of labour in vain, which he had spent so
many years in accumulating, was likely to be left to moulder away and
fall of itself into oblivion,--having at its first appearance excited
neither enough of envy or admiration to render it extensively attractive
to public curiosity,--lay down in despondency at its base, amidst his
perished hopes; and though he made several attempts afterwards to rise,
these were all equally unavailing, and the latest solace of his life was
the contemplation of that glory descending upon his son which had
departed from him.

In considering the fate, by a natural death (so to express it), after a
date somewhat longer than that of a natural life, of those who have been
renowned in their own age, but have dwindled into insignificance, or
become utterly extinct in that which followed, it may be said of the far
greater number of those who flourish among contemporaries, not, indeed,
that they,


"are born to blush unseen,
And waste their sweetness on the desert air,"


but that they are flowers which bloom in their season, and charm with
their fragrance the passers by of one generation, then disappear, and
are remembered no more. This is the order of Providence, and it is wise
and good; for were the Almighty less liberal of his gifts, though the
possessors being "few and far between" might be more admired and longer,
the world would be less benefited than by that perpetual succession and
supply (according to the demand for literature) of minds worthy,
perhaps, of any age, but formed peculiarly to suit the taste, the
manners, and the society of their own. Among Chalmers' "English Poets,"
for example, how many names, once illustrious, now merely catalogued,
are prefixed to works, unread though unforgotten, on which talents as
diversified and as well cultivated as the circumstances of the times
would allow were painfully expended, to delight and improve mankind;
each of whose possessors hoped, besides serving his own generation, to
leave something behind which the world would not willingly let die. Yet
it may be questioned whether some of these, had they lived in other
periods, or under different orders of things, might not have taken far
higher rank among the candidates for fame, and established permanent
claims to the veneration of posterity. Is not great genius, as we call
it, when fortunately developed, and favoured by many contingencies,
without which it never would have been so developed, more common than is
generally imagined? Is there not at all times and every where a class of
intelligences which may be trained up to become generals and captains in
literature, in comparison with the rank and file out of which they may
be called by peculiar events in their own or their nation's history, and
without which they could not have risen above the ordinary state of
their less distinguished, but, perhaps, equally capable companions; as
the working bees in a hive, as some naturalists tell us, when their
queen is lost or taken away from the little community, by a particular
regimen, may be nourished up into queens, and from labourers become
perpetuators of the race? There seems some probability for this
hypothesis, fanciful as it may be deemed, because in all extraordinary
emergencies, whether in the world of politics or of literature, minds of
the first order are invariably brought into activity from the motives,
the means, and the opportunities then afforded to them, though they
could never have risen above the depression, mediocrity, or neutral
indifference to which they were born, in which they had long lived, and
must assuredly have died, had it not been for those apparently
accidental opportunities which gave them distinction and pre-eminence,
by a change in themselves resembling a new creation, but in reality only
an awakening of latent powers.

While Torquato was thus continually giving new pledges, and redeeming
old ones of equal lustre, or surpassing the proudest names in his
country's literature, the old man, from bitter but unprofitable
experience as regarded himself, having proved the precariousness of the
favour of princes, and the vanity of expecting fortune to follow fame in
verse, determined to indemnify his son for the loss of both his parents'
property by bringing him up to a profession in which wealth and honour
might more readily be acquired by common industry than by idly looking
for the golden rewards of genius at the hands either of aristocratic
patrons, who bestow them as bounties, or of the multitude that compose
the public, and who care little about the good or ill fare of those on
whom their transient applauses are lavished.


"So praisen babes the peacock's spotted trayne,
And wondren at bright Argus' golden eye:
But who rewardes him e'er the more for thy,
Or feedes him once the fuller by a graine?"

SPENSER, _Ecl. X._


In his seventeenth year, therefore, Bernardo placed his son at Padua, to
study jurisprudence, as Petrarch and Ariosto had been condemned to do
before him, by prudent parents, and like each of those hopeful sons, who
were


"born a father's hopes to cross,
And pen a stanza when he should engross,"


Torquato (though it is said that he dutifully and diligently applied
with his head to the study of the law) gave his heart and his hand in
secret to the unportioned muse. The issue of this affiance, while he was
yet embroiled in the nets of legal precedents and practice, was the
"Rinaldo" already mentioned, a romantic poem, in twelve cantos. The hero
is not his own champion of that name, the glory of his later poems, but
one of "the million" that figure in the "Orlando Furioso"--a work which
so possessed the mind of young Tasso, while he was at Venice, that he
tells us he could not sleep for the fame of Ariosto. This juvenile
performance is written more after the manner of that inimitable master
than the "Gerusalemme;" but, though deficient in the humour and vivacity
which constitute the all-binding and assimilating spell of Ariosto's
tissue of episodes, and by which the reader is reconciled to wink at all
the author's incongruities and caprices, Tasso's poem, nevertheless, by
a more serious kind of magic, laid hold upon public feeling and so
happily hit the expiring taste of his countrymen for the extravagances
of chivalrous fiction, that where his father, after years of hard toil
in the same fields had miscarried, the son, in ten months, achieved a
triumph, of which the trophies remain to this day; "Rinaldo" being yet
one of the metrical romances which are interwoven with the party
coloured staple of Italian literature.

Well might Bernardo be astonished and delighted, yet humbled and
chagrined (in some measure), when the manuscript of his son's poem was
presented to him, seeing himself already eclipsed in his meridian
altitude (which he fondly imagined he had attained in the "Amadigi") by
this morning-star of promise just "flaming in the forehead of the orient
sky;" and perceiving, as he must have done, that his purpose was for
ever thwarted, of placing the boy in that path where fortune scatters
her golden apples before the feet of competitors in the race for her
favour, rather than indulging them with golden dreams under the shadows
of laurels planted by the wayside, the most precious rewards which she
bestows on the most successful among poets. The father, however, was too
great a lover of song to ruin a good poet in making a bad lawyer, as
might have been the case had he persevered in his former views with his
son. Wherefore, after some delay, he reluctantly, yet willingly, (a
state of mind perfectly possible, though hard to reconcile,) gave his
consent to the publication of the "Rinaldo." He who in the letter to his
daughter formerly quoted, so tenderly and beautifully anticipated the
happiness of being himself, with his very features, perpetuated in her
infant progeny, could not but be transported to see himself, with the
features of his very soul, perpetuated in the glorious offspring of his
son's congenial yet surpassing mind. With a smile and a sigh, therefore,
he permitted the poem to appear, surrendering at the same time his
cherished expectation of seeing that son as eminent in the law as he was
now likely to be in that which is remotest from law practice and law
profits. "Let who will make the laws," said Fletcher of Saltoun, "let me
make the songs of a people, and by these I will govern them." Tasso's
songs have assuredly had larger dominion, and had deeper, wider, more
enduring influence in modifying the subsequent character of his
countrymen than any legislative enactments, in which it may be imagined
that he would never have been concerned, could have exercised. But then
he might have enriched and ennobled himself; he might have escaped most
of the calamities which hunted him to death in the midst of life; and he
might not only have been happier himself, but a more useful member of
that society in which he was born, which he served in his day, and in
which he died without any monument except some splendid sculpture to
record his name. It came otherwise to pass; and whether the world has
been made better or worse by his labours, it must be acknowledged that
the fame which he sought, and for which he sacrificed all beside, was
dearly purchased to himself by the sufferings which it cost him to win.
It is reported that when Bernardo remonstrated with him on his
indiscreet preference of philosophy (for with him philosophy and poetry
were identified) to jurisprudence, and angrily demanded, "What has your
philosophy done for you?" he replied, "It has taught me to bear with
meekness the reproofs of a father."

The appearance of Torquato's "Rinaldo" was not only the dawn of his own
day of glory, but the dawn of a new day in the literature of his
country. The age of absolute romance was succeeded by one of transition
in public taste, during which what was most truly wonderful and
meritoriously captivating in the wild fictions of knight-errantry was
engrafted upon a stock of classical invention, design, and execution.
This was in fact the nearest recurrence that could be made in epic
poetry to the models of the ancients,--for the mythological machinery of
Greece and Rome could not again be revived in poetry any more than in
religion; Jupiter could never again resume his thunder and his throne;
Neptune his trident; Pallas her ægis, or Venus her cestus; nor could
the supernatural interposition of the supreme God, the agency of angels
and sainted spirits, or of Saturn and his legions, be extensively
employed (without constructive irreverence, not to say rank blasphemy)
as auxiliaries in heroic fable, disguised as true history, or true
history disguised as heroic fable. Tasso, Marino, Camoëns, and Milton
have indeed presumed upon the perilous experiment of enlisting the
armies of heaven and hell in conflict with each other, and intermeddling
with earthly affairs; yet, with the exception of our countryman--and he
would be a bold critic who should dare to arraign him for impiety in the
use of what nothing but the most signal, unexampled, and inimitable
felicity of success could justify,--it may be added, that he would be a
critic not less bold, who, as a believer in the Christian faith, should
venture to defend even Milton to the extent in which he has exercised
this questionable, though hitherto unlitigated, license of
fiction;--with the exception of our countryman, the authors aforenamed
have, for the most part, grievously miscarried in the management of
their agents of this class, whether good or evil, these being among the
most indifferent and ineffective personages in their respective poems.
Epic poetry, indeed, either upon classic or romantic precedent, may be
said to have become extinct from the time of Tasso. "Paradise Lost"
cannot be classed with either; he having achieved the only work of the
kind, which, being neither the one nor the other, but combining the
merits of each, touched the point beyond which improvement could not be
carried. He may be said to have lived in the last age in which
supernatural agents and miraculous interventions could be successfully
introduced into narrative verse, as being consistent with popular
credulity or superstitious belief--an absolutely indispensable requisite
for the employment of such means to illustrate human affairs. For
example, a poem equal to Homers or Ariosto's, written now on the plan,
and with the gods of the one or the enchantments of the other, would be
insufferable: no power of genius could create an interest in behalf of
Apollo and Venus, no longer believed in by the poet or by his readers;
nor would the achievements of giants and witches, if celebrated by one
born in this "age of reason," find mercy from criticism, or indulgence
even from the vulgar students of our _penny_ literature. Monk Lewis's
Tales of Wonder, and the monstrosities of the German drama, have been
long ago forgotten; the "Michael Scott" of the great minstrel "of that
ilk!" alone keeps his ground; but all the other preternatural machines
of the same creative hand would have perished utterly, had they not been
associated with records of the doings and sufferings of beings of flesh
and blood like ourselves, though existing in a state of semi-barbarous
society exceedingly different from our own.

The "Rinaldo" was the first form of the abstract conception of a regular
poem, at once to rival Virgil and Ariosto, which originated in the mind
of Torquato while yet a youth of seventeen, but was not wholly developed
till, at twice that age, he had produced the "Gerusalemme Liberata." All
the characteristics of his peculiar genius are perceptible in the
incidents, style, embellishments, and conduct of this juvenile essay;
which, contrasted with the matured form and perfect majesty of that
later offspring of his genius, is, as his own Gabriel, sent to comfort
Godfrey, at the opening of the siege of Jerusalem:--take the image in
Fairfax's version,--


"A stripling seem'd he, thrice five winter's old,
And radiant beams adorn'd his locks of gold,"--


compared with Milton's "Raphael," "in prime of manhood, where youth
ended," alighting on the eastern cliff of Paradise, where,--


"like Maia's son he stood,
And shook his wings, that heavenly fragrance fill'd
The circuit wide."[40]

This prodigy of youthful genius no sooner appeared than it was hailed
with acclamation throughout Italy, and eager inquiries from every
quarter were made concerning the author--that prodigality of praise
might be lavished upon him by the learned, and parsimony of recompence,
doled out to him by princes, ambitious of attaching so great a "natural
curiosity" to the collection of live rarities about their palaces. For
the great of those times coveted the glory, little as they liked the
expense, of retaining men of talents in the train of their sycophants
and dependents, even when they regarded them only as remarkable among
their species, in the same manner as the lions, tigers, eagles,
peacocks, and other strange and beautiful animals in their menageries
were in comparison with the meaner ranks of brutes. Ariosto, who had
experienced all the bitterness of such favour, and felt keenly the
ignominy of such distinction, plainly tells us, that the patrons of his
day loved those of their parasites who would minister to their personal
necessities, pull off and on their boots, share in their orgies, and
pander to their vices,--rather than those, whose proud stomachs
disdained to allow them to be any thing less than themselves within the
precincts of courts,--poets among princes, who could give enduring
lustre to the names of inglorious patrons, which otherwise would have
found no better memorial than the registers of their births, marriages,
and deaths in their family genealogies.

After Torquato's emancipation from the trammels of law by the hand of
the parent who had so carefully involved him in them,--flushed with the
new wine of liberty, obtained at the surrender of every thing else in
prospect, and with nothing but itself in possession,--he repaired to
Bologna, to pursue his philosophical studies and indulge in his poetical
passion;--for poetry was truly to him a passion, and the ruling one of
his existence,--honour, fortune, ease, pleasure, were all in turns but
ministers _to_ this, while _by_ this he aimed at the acquisition of each
of them, as the one or the other were, for the moment, the object of
desire or the subject of lamentation for having lost it. But from Bologna
he was expelled for a literary squib, the only thing of the kind by which
he has gained any celebrity, whether it were his own or not. Some
anonymous censor had been amusing himself with publishing pasquinades,
ridiculing the principal people of the city, as well as the students of
the college, with "much malice and a little wit." Those who were exposed
to these sarcasms were exceedingly galled by the firing from this
ambuscade of the pen, and the more so as they knew not on whom to wreak
their vengeance. Torquato, in the reckless gaiety of a youth of twenty,
on a certain occasion making himself merry among his companions by
repeating one of these, was immediately pounced upon as the author, not
only of the unlucky lines, with which he had been caught in his mouth,
but he was assailed as being the secret manufacturer of all the rest. It
was in vain that he denied the charge indignantly, and challenged his
accusers for the proofs, urging that he himself had been the butt of the
sharp-shooter's shafts, flying out of darkness and hitting in broad day.
His papers were seized and examined before the criminal magistrate; but
nothing being discovered to fix the imputation upon him, he was
nominally acquitted, though the suspicion was not so easily effaced from
the minds of the offended individuals. He took the matter himself in
such dudgeon, that he precipitately left Bologna, and removed to Padua,
whither he had been Invited by his early friend Scipio Gonzaga, who had
lately established in the latter city the academy _Degli Eterei_, of
which Tasso--certainly one of the most congenial spirits of the age--was
worthily enrolled a member, and, according to the pedantic fashion of
those pompous but puerile institutions, assumed the name of
_Pentito_--for some fanciful reason not well explained, though there has
been no small wrangling about it.

To enlarge his mind, to exalt his imagination, and to enrich his
eloquence, Torquato now devoted much of his attention to the works of
Aristotle and Plato; but while the former subjected his reason to the
severest discipline in the ascertainment of principles of truth, he gave
his whole soul to the guidance of the latter, whose visionary splendour
and profound speculations, on subjects the highest that created
intelligences can conceive, and of which comparatively so little can be
learned without "light from heaven" to illumine the "light of
nature,"--while infinite space is afforded for everlasting conjectures,
showing at once the capabilities and the limitations of the human
intellect,--these peculiarly suited the young student's cast of thought
and intense delight in contemplating the things that are invisible and
eternal, as associated with things seen and perishable. Nor was the
philosophical poet an unworthy disciple of the poetical philosopher,
even upon his own ground and in his own style. Many of Tasso's sublimest
compositions are in the form of dialogues, in which he discourses with
an elevation of sentiment and a power of diction which might have gained
admiration in the school of his master himself.

Meanwhile the germ of his great poem, which had been quickened, probably
not later than the publication of the "Rinaldo," was growing up in his
thought,--for Tasso, by the necessity of his nature, was ever ruminating
on some premeditated or progressive theme; and some mightier conception
followed the disburdenment of every matured production of his
inexhaustibly inventive genius. While this new and magnificent project
was gradually assuming shape and character before he entered upon the
deliberate execution of it, he prepared himself for the task by
composing his "Discourses on Heroic Poetry," which place him among
critics in as high a rank as that which he holds among poets. The merit
of these essays, indeed, is so remarkable, that his principal English
biographer, Mr. Black, is almost seduced by them to assert the
universality of the author's genius, in the following plausible remark
and happy quotations from high authority concerning another
extraordinary poetic genius, which seemed capable of excelling in
whatever it undertook, whether in prose or rhyme:--"Of the 'Discourses
on Heroic Poetry' there appear to have been four, only three of which
have been printed. Though composed at the age of twenty, and published
without the knowledge and corrections of the author, they are
exceedingly valuable; and while they display a most refined taste,
discover also much metaphysical acuteness and geometrical precision.
Indeed, I am more and more of opinion that what Mr. Stewart says of
Burns is true in general of every great poetical genius, 'All the
faculties of Burns's mind,' says he, 'were, as far as I could judge,
equally vigorous; and his predilection for poetry was rather the result
of his own enthusiastic and impassioned temper, than of a genius
exclusively adapted to that species of composition.'"

In this year, 1564, Torquato visited his venerable father, now literally
"_dagl' anni e da fortuna oppresso_," "borne down by years and evil
fortune." The transport of affection with which two of the greatest men
of their age, in the most seductive walk of human ambition, met at
Mantua, in the relationship of parent and offspring, must have been
chastened, yet rendered more exquisitely endearing, when the father,
from his own sad experience, must have foreseen, by "his prophetic
soul," the sorrows to come which his son would encounter in the course
that he had chosen; while the son, with emotions not less painful, must
have looked upon his father, remembering the sorrows past, which he had
endured in the vain pursuit of fame from the multitude, and fortune from
patrons, in whose cause he had sacrificed two sources of competence--his
own small patrimony, and his wife's dowry.

During this visit the youth was attacked by a dangerous illness, from
which being rescued by the skill of a physician named Coppino, the
grateful father rewarded the doctor with the fee of a stanza to his
honour in a new poem, entitled "Floridante," which the aged minstrel,
whom no medicine could cure of the disease of rhyme, was composing in
his seventy-third year. This daughter, as she might be called, of his
"Amadigi," to which it is a sequel, and his own last child of
imagination, proved as short-lived as its romantic, and almost as its
natural, parent, though the dutiful Torquato endeavoured himself to
revive it, in his own dark days; but "Floridante," of whom it could not
be said that "she had no poet," died though she had two, and those of no
mean name. Bernardo Tasso himself survived for five years, dying in
1669, at the age of seventy-six. However undervalued by posterity, he
was unquestionably the greatest poet who had appeared between Ariosto
and his son Torquato.

About this time Torquato received an intimation that the cardinal
d'Este, brother to the duke of Ferrara, had nominated him one of his
personal attendants, and expected him forthwith in that city.
Notwithstanding the warnings of his father's old friend, Sperone, and
afterwards his own, Zoilus, who, exasperated by the disappointment of
hopes of preferment which he had cherished when he went to Rome, gave
loose to the most violent invectives against courts and courtiers, and
earnestly dissuaded Torquato from trusting himself where nothing but
allurements to ruin would be placed in his way, from which it was hardly
possible for virtue to escape unscathed or uncorrupted, the young poet,
however, determined not to profit by the experience of the old one, but
to learn for himself what experience alone can teach, and what he indeed
learned at an awful cost in the issue. He resolutely, therefore,
determined to put both his virtue and his fortune to the hazard of
temptation, not doubting that he could secure the former and advance the
latter, where the most illustrious court in Italy was held by a
descendant of the patron of Ariosto. Accordingly he hastened to Ferrara,
anticipating every thing that _never_ came to pass, except the one thing
on which, indeed, his mind was most bent, that there he should complete
his contemplated epic, and establish a name which should associate him
with the most renowned of his predecessors. What a bright morning was
that, forerunning a day of darkness and despair, on which he entered the
city, happily unsuspecting the troubles that awaited him there! The
kings of England, of the house of Hanover, are lineally descended from
the family of Este. These much celebrated princes, in the best period of
their ascendency, during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, were
the magnificent, if not the liberal, patrons of most of the men of
genius in the finer arts who were contemporary with them; and none was
more so than the reigning duke, Alfonso II., under whose benign
influence for a while, but under whose blighting displeasure afterwards,
poor Tasso flourished and faded.

On the last day of October, 1565, Torquato arrived at Ferrara, where the
most superb preparations were making for the nuptials of Alfonso with
Barbara, daughter of the emperor Ferdinand, and sister to Maximilian II.
He was cordially welcomed, and immediately received into the service of
the duke's brother, cardinal Luigi, whose establishment consisted of
nearly 800 persons, ministering to his pleasure or subsisting on his
bounty. This prince was not less dignified than his brother, but
altogether more amiable and engaging. On the 2d of December the queen
(as she was styled from her imperial lineage) entered Ferrara, crowned,
and accompanied by a gorgeous retinue. The marriage was celebrated by a
succession of the most imposing spectacles and profuse festivities,
which continued for six days, when they were suddenly broken off on the
arrival of intelligence of the death of the pope, Pius IV. Among the
throng of the great and the small, who had assembled from all parts of
Italy to witness the tournaments, the pantomimes, the balls, and the
banquets given on this occasion, Torquato was but a solitary unit;
observing and treasuring up in his memory all that he saw and heard, as
materials for celebration in another form of the same scenes of luxury
and splendour upon a grander scale, and, though in an ideal field, of
more enduring exhibition. Myriads of eyes may have glanced upon the
contemplative youth, and passed over him as one of the most
insignificant personages in the city; but, after the lapse of nearly
three centuries, even these gorgeous ceremonials are principally
subjects of interest because he was present at them. Not a human being
in existence at this remote period (one might imagine) can feel any
personal sympathy with the bridegroom, the bride, or any other actor or
spectator, native or stranger, upon the spot; yet even "the
representation of the Temple of Love, which was erected in the ducal
gardens, with a stupendous scenery of porticoes and palaces, of woods
and mountains," is worthy of being remembered, because of the
far-surpassing glory of imaginative palaces and gardens which were
suggested to the admiring poet by the tawdry pageant, "which lasted six
hours _without appearing tedious to the spectators_," as Muratori
states; though, according to the pithy remark of Gibbon, the latter is
"the most incredible circumstance" connected with the whole account.

During the four months which intervened between the demise of Pius IV.
and the election of a new pope, who assumed the name of Pius V.,
Torquato's patron, the cardinal Luigi, being absent, he was left at
Ferrara to make his way into favour wherever an opening might be
presented; and it was then that he became more particularly acquainted
with the princesses Lucretia and Leonora of Este, by whom he was brought
under the notice of their brother the duke, who, after all that has been
said and conjectured, seems never to have regarded him otherwise than
with stately or selfish condescension. That a youth so gifted with
genius, so early distinguished among his countrymen, favoured by nature
with more than ordinary personal advantages, and in many other ways
gallantly accomplished, should have attracted the esteem of these
illustrious ladies, who appear to have been more than mere court
beauties, both in intellect and sensibility, delighting in poetry, and
occasionally exercising themselves in it, was almost a necessary
consequence of the parties becoming acquainted. Under such
circumstances, nothing could be more natural than that, on either side,
secret presentiments of the most gratifying kind should unconsciously
spring up and be covertly cherished by the several individuals; never,
indeed, as must be inferred from the sequel, to be fully disclosed, nor
even, perhaps, perfectly understood by themselves. If, in the age of
chivalry, it was imperative upon true knights to assert the beauty and
maintain the honour of their ladies in all due seasons, and in all
proper places, it was, in the seventeenth century, equally the duty of
true poets to celebrate the same virtues and adornments in their verses
upon those of the better sex, who were either their mistresses or their
patronesses. Torquato, dazzled by the transition from schools, law
offices, and colleges of philosophy, to the court region of enchantment,
has described his own emotions and the influence of the change upon him
in the language which he puts into the mouth of _Tirsi_ (the
representative of himself in his "Amintor"), where, after taking
vengeance on his father's friend, but his own very questionable one
(Sperone), for having dissuaded him from going to the city, which, he
assured him, was given up wholly to deceit, voluptuousness, avarice, and
ambition, the shepherd tells his companions how bravely he was disabused
when he beheld the marvellous reality; for there, "as gracious heaven
would have it, I happened to pass near the blissful dwelling, whence
issued sweet, harmonious voices of swans, of nymphs, of syrens--heavenly
syrens! and sounds of music soft and clear, with other ravishments so
strange, that for a while I stood entranced with joy and admiration."
Being courteously invited to enter by one of noble aspect, who appeared
the guardian of the enchanted spot, he exclaims, "O then what saw, what
felt I? I beheld nymphs, goddesses, and minstrels--luminaries new and
beautiful--all without veil or cloud, as to the immortals, scattering
silver dews and golden rays, Aurora seems; Apollo and the Muses, too, I
saw, and in that moment felt myself as growing greater. Filled with new
virtue, new divinity, I sang of wars and heroes, disdaining my rude
pastoral pipe. But though I soon returned to these calm shades (to
please another), I still retained a portion of that nobler spirit; my
simple reed no longer warbled as before, but, rivalling the trumpet,
filled the woods with notes more lofty and sonorous. Mopso (Sperone)
heard it, and, with evil eye, looked on me and bewitched me, so that I
grew hoarse, and long continued mute. The shepherds thought I had been
glared at by a wolf--a wolf, indeed, he was to me!" The last allusion is
to Sperone's savage criticisms on the "Gerusalemme," when submitted to
his examination in manuscript. Torquato, however, had reason to think,
after years of disappointing experience, that Sperone's notions of
courts and courtiers were quite as near the truth as his own, during his
first visit and sojourn at Ferrara.

Of the duke, his brother the cardinal, and their three sisters, it is
recorded that thirteen years before this date, on a public occasion, in
presence of their father, Hercules II., and pope Paul III., the
"Adelphi" of Terence, in the original, was recited by them with great
spirit and effect, the parts being sustained by the princesses Anna,
aged twelve, Lucretia, eight, Leonora, six, the princes Alfonso, ten,
and Luigi, five years of age. Mr. Black observes, with apparent justice,
that the court of Alfonso united, "like the poems of Tasso, classic
elegance with the richness of romance; and every thing conspired to
kindle the fancy and refine the taste of the youthful bard."

Anna, the eldest of the three sisters above named, in 1548 was married
to the celebrated Francis, duke of Guise, and, after his decease, to
James of Savoy, duke of Nemours. Lucretia, some years later than Tasso's
arrival at her brother's court, was married to the prince of Urbino,
only fifteen years old, when she herself was thirty-seven. This was one
of those state alliances which so little resemble treaties of peace,
that they deserve to be branded as treaties of discord, in which royal
and noble parents sacrifice their children, if not to Moloch, at least
to Mammon--nay, too often to both,--for purposes of family
aggrandisement, by adding territory to territory, and confounding blood
with blood. On the occasion of these unhappy nuptials, Tasso, "as in
duty bound," wrote an epithalamium, which had, in its predictions of
felicity, the equivocal qualification for excelling in that kind of
poetry which Waller, with experienced adroitness, hinted to Charles II.,
when rallied by his majesty on having composed a far finer panegyric on
Cromwell than on himself--the qualification of fiction; for scarcely had
the ill-paired couple had time to fall out, when the gallant prince left
his bride to volunteer in a crusade against the Turks, with whom
everlasting warfare, in every petty form of hostility, was wont to be
carried on by the states of Italy. The union ultimately was dissolved,
without the intervention of death; and Lucretia, as duchess of Urbino,
returned to Ferrara. For many years afterwards, she was, more openly
than either her brother or her younger sister, the patron of Tasso, and
to her are some of his most graceful lyrics addressed.

Leonora, the third and younger sister, remained unmarried. Being highly
attractive in person, in manner, and in mind, it is no wonder if
Torquato, having many opportunities of ingratiating himself in her
favour, should be gradually betrayed, under the guise of that romantic
strain of adulation to rank and beauty (especially in verse) which the
fashion of the times not only tolerated but sanctioned, to insinuate all
the fervour of a passion which, though hardly aware of it himself, and
altogether unacknowledged by its sensitive object, might yet be
harboured in the bosoms of both, though so secretly, that each more
complacently and jealously watched the symptoms of a tender attachment
in the other, than cared to examine the reality of the same in
themselves. The mystery, thus cherished, for the tantalising delight of
a hope too remote to be fulfilled, except at the sacrifice of every
thing but that love, for which, if true, nothing might be deemed too
much to be sacrificed, has never been cleared up, and all reasoning and
conjecture on the subject, at this distance of time, must be vain. It
has been with equal confidence both affirmed and denied, that the poet
imprudently aspired to the hand of the princess, and that the princess
as imprudently surrendered her heart to the poet, though, from
necessity, she withheld her hand. From the numberless _canzoni_ and
_sonetti_, of which love is the theme, among the _rime_ of Tasso, no
premises towards the solution of this problem can be drawn. Dante and
Petrarch, in all their effusions of the kind, are constant each to his
respective mistress. Beatrice and Laura are the perpetual idols of their
amorous devotion; but to so many--or, if to one, under so many different
names and characters,--are Tasso's adorations addressed, that he may
have had fifty fits of passion for as many flames, and been as true in
turn to each and equally volatile to all. It is, however, a remarkable
circumstance, that three of the greatest poets of Italy should owe as
much of their posthumous renown to their questionable love as to their
acknowledged genius, having been avowedly attached to ladies whose very
existence is unascertained at this day, though volumes have been
written, proving nothing more than (to borrow the comprehensive judgment
of sir Roger de Coverley) that "much may be said on both sides."

In the mean time, whatever was the subsequent conduct of Alfonso towards
Tasso, there seems to be no doubt that, for a considerable period during
which the poet was engaged upon his great work, the duke countenanced
him in the way most agreeable to his literary ambition and his personal
vanity; for he loved rich apparel, splendid apartments, sumptuous fare,
and to be associated with persons of the highest rank--feeling that he
could adorn and dignify the circle in which he moved, both as a man of
genius exalted above competition by intellectual endowments, and as a
man of the world qualified to shine in external demeanour among
gentlemen and soldiers as well as among students and men of letters.
During this prosperous period--when the smiles of princesses, who were
pleased to receive the homage of his muse, flattered his gentler
affections, and the favour of sovereigns gratified the pride of a heart
easily elevated to an eminence of self-satisfaction, from which the fall
when it came was the more terrible, and the dashing to pieces of its
hopes and its claims the more humiliating and deplorable--Tasso
accompanied the cardinal Luigi as legate to the court of France. Here
his fame had prepared the way for his reception with peculiar honour by
Charles IX., himself both a lover of verse and a versifier. It is said
that the king offered the poet some splendid presents, which the latter
declined to accept, though he was so scantily provided with a wardrobe,
that he left the kingdom, at the end of twelve months, in the same suit
of clothes in which he entered it. The snake has but one skin, but while
that is wearing out another is forming beneath: it would be well for
poets, who live on court expectations, if they were as well provided.

As not many personal anecdotes are related of our poet, two or three
indifferent ones may be given here as specimens of the tone of his
conversation and address in public. A poet of some repute having
committed a crime for which he was condemned to die, Tasso resolved to
obtain, if possible, a mitigation of the punishment. At the palace he
learned that the sentence was about to be executed immediately.
Undiscouraged, however, he pressed forward; and being admitted to the
presence, he thus addressed the king:--"May it please your majesty, I am
come to implore you to put to death a wretch, who has brought disgrace
upon philosophy, by showing that she cannot stand out against human
depravity." The king, struck with the turn of the request, spared the
criminal. Being asked by his majesty one day, "Whether men most
resembled God in happiness, in sovereign power, or in the ability to do
good?" Tasso replied, "Men can resemble God only by their
virtue."--Again, before the same monarch a discussion was held to
determine what condition in life is most unfortunate. "In my opinion,"
said Tasso, "the most deplorable condition is that of an impatient old
man, borne down by poverty, who has neither fortune to preserve him from
want, nor philosophy to support himself under suffering."

In the course of this journey, whatever he may have gained in honour at
the French court, gratification in the society of eminent
contemporaries, and knowledge of the country and people of his hero,
Godfrey, Torquato lost the favour of cardinal Luigi, as Ariosto
forfeited that of the cardinals kinsman and predecessor, Hippolyto of
Este; though not for the same reason--want of servility to his highness
(Luigi probably not exacting such base homage as Ariosto's barbarian
patron had done), but for having manifested more zeal for the catholic
faith than, in the opinion of some of his confidants, was deemed politic
at a time, when, for the most treacherous purposes, previous to the
massacre of St. Bartholomew, the protestants were treated with unwonted
indulgence, to throw them off their guard. Hereupon he returned to
Italy, though not immediately to Ferrara; for, travelling in company
with Manzuoli, the secretary of the late embassy, we find that he
arrived at Rome in January, 1572. Here he was cordially welcomed by many
of his father's old acquaintances, as well as greatly distinguished for
his own sake. Pope Pius V. honoured him with an audience, and the
privilege of kissing his foot.

Through the mediation of the duchess of Urbino and Leonora, he was soon
afterwards formally admitted into the service of Alfonso, with a pension
of a hundred and eighty gold crowns a year, and the understanding that
no personal duties would be required of him; but that he should be at
liberty to pursue his studies and finish his poem at his own leisure.
Generous as this provision undoubtedly was, it yet made him a captive in
golden chains, too weak to bind the limbs, but strong enough to enthral
the soul and enslave the mind. So, at least, Torquato found his
obligation; and even when on both sides it had been broken, after his
second imprisonment, he was never in spirit enfranchised from the yoke
of Alfonso, till death set him free. His own testimony concerning his
patron's munificence at this time, long after he had lost his favour, is
honourable to both:--"He raised me from the darkness of my low estate to
the light and glory of his court; he removed me from penury to
abundance; he exceedingly enhanced the value of my works, by often and
willing listening while I read, and treating their author with every
mark of esteem. He placed me at his table, and countenanced me with his
personal attention; and he never denied me a favour which I requested."

Under these auspices, while Tasso was still vigorously prosecuting that
splendid crusade of his muse, the poetical siege of Jerusalem, and had
now nearly made himself master of it for an everlasting stronghold of
his poetical sovereignty, his exuberant mind poured out multitudes of
sonnets, canzoni, and other miscellanies in verse and prose--almost
entirely on transient themes, love fancies, and panegyrical attempts--


----"to give a deathless lot
To names inglorious, born to be forgot."


Among these, in the composition of which it might be questioned whether
he was wasting his genius or cultivating it, he produced something more
excellent, in the form of a pastoral drama. Accordingly, the most
beautiful offspring of his imagination--so far as refers to exquisite
grace of diction, and consummate skill in adorning a subject altogether
artificial, and feigning a state of society that never did, never could,
never ought to exist,--in a story not very natural though the incidents
are few, nor very happily connected or intelligibly developed,--his
"Aminta" appeared, written in flowing verse of various measures without
rhyme, and enriched with lyric chorusses of extraordinary elegance. How
the public exhibition of such a drama could be tolerated, before the
most exalted personages of the state, ladies of the highest character,
and religionists of the most plausible professions, is very difficult
for us, in our cold climate, and with our severer as well as juster
sentiments of decorum, to imagine. All that can be said in extenuation
of the audience, and perhaps of the poet, comes to this presumption,
that, though the piece abounds with descriptions and allusions the most
voluptuous and fascinating to awaken the most perilous passions in
youth, and which no gravity of age ought to endure, such were the
manners of the day, and so little of evil was apprehended, where the
serpent, that allured Eve with his wiles of beauty among the flowers of
paradise, put on this pastoral disguise of the innocence of the golden
age, that the fair and the virtuous alike imagined themselves as
guiltless in listening to his blandishments, as Milton represents the
mother of mankind to have been unsuspicious of danger, when she followed
the tempter to the forbidden tree, and entered into a parley with him
there, till at length, beguiled by his subtilty, "she plucked, she ate."
And here a subject too delicate to be handled on the present occasion
must be left to every one's conscience who indulges in the luxury of
such reading as the work under consideration furnishes. It is remarkable
that the author, designating himself under the name of _Tirsi_, seems to
have been forewarned of the malady which soon afterwards overwhelmed
him, and to which, no doubt, from constitutional temperament he had been
prone from his youth upward, and which, in premature old age, cast such
clouds of mystery over the gloom and splendour of his latter life.
"Knowest thou not what _Tirsi_ wrote, when, fired with frenzy, he
wandered through the forest, at once moving laughter and pity among the
lovely nymphs and shepherds? Nor _wrote_ he even then 'things worthy to
be laughed at, although he _did_ such things.'"

The duchess of Urbino being absent from Ferrara, when Tasso's muse, like
Habington's "halcyon," produced


"The happy miracle of this rare birth,"


invited him to her delightful retirement of Casteldurante, where she
heard the pastoral strains from his own lips, which, though not eloquent
from natural infirmity, would yet convey the soul and passion, the
delicacy and pathos, of every passage, with an impression which no actor
on the stage, nor indeed any reader but himself, could give. The living
voice, in this case, would be the actual language of the spirit that
conceived the thoughts, speaking to the spirit of her who received them
through the ear, fresh and flowing from the fountain in his heart; for
the written copy, to the eye, would be but a translation, wanting the
incommunicable accompaniments of tone, look, expression, and perfect
intelligence of the whole in all its bearings and meanings, such as the
original author alone could possess; for, as Dr. Johnson said, "no
_words_ can convey _sounds_;" and both sounds and words were requisite
to do justice to such verse as his. Tasso remained several months with
the duchess.

All Italy soon echoed with the fame of this poetical phenomenon, which,
though not the first of the kind, (an indifferent model having been
produced six years before, by one Arienti,) it was the first that had
power to compel almost universal admiration, and establish a precedent
and authority for that fantastic species of literary composition.
Imitations, by the most gifted of his contemporaries, sprang up in rapid
succession, and passed away as rapidly, with the exception of one, the
"Pastor Fido" of Guarini, which not only maintained its ground, but even
disputed that on which its forerunner stood, and from which no rivalry
has ever yet been able to remove it. The renown which Tasso acquired by
the "Aminta" naturally exasperated envy in proportion as it commanded
applause, and among the multitude of competitors who could not soar to
his elevation, there were not wanting those who employed every artifice
to bring him down to their level, that they might trample him under
foot. Whatever were the causes, Tasso to the end of his life was
persecuted as much by unmerciful critics as he was oppressed by
hard-hearted patrons.

But the "Aminta" was not the only episodal enterprise of Tasso, while he
was slowly but unweariedly proceeding with the "Gerusalemme." Flushed
with the success of his pastoral drama, he set earnestly about the
construction of a regular tragedy; but he had not advanced far in the
second act, when the project was suspended, and the fragment of fine
promise which remains, compared with the completed performance long
afterwards, when his faculties were on the decline, exhibits a brilliant
but melancholy contrast of "the change" that had come "o'er the spirit
of his dream"--his dream of life, love, and glory, blighting his "May of
youth," and causing him in the prime of manhood to "fall into the sere
and yellow leaf." His "Torindo," as this failure was styled, was less a
failure than the "Torrismondo," as the resumed and perfected task was
called.

Towards the conclusion of his toils on his main work (as he fondly
hoped), but the beginning of a series of miseries consequent upon it,
from which he found no end but in the grave, Tasso was seized with a
violent fever. This left him in such a state of bodily exhaustion, that
it was not till the following spring (1575), that from the last lines of
his poem he could look back upon all the intervening ones to the first,
as the links of a chain, more subtle than air, yet stronger than
adamant, which should deliver his thoughts as he had bound them in his
words, from generation to generation, to delight millions of minds, so
long as his country's language should be understood. He had already
enjoyed such exhilarating foretastes of fame by the circulation in
manuscript of portions of the poem, as they came completed from his
hands, that he was the less prepared to encounter the enmity and
opposition, which rancorous and intriguing rivals, or fanatic and
supercilious ecclesiastical censors of the press, immediately commenced,
and inveterately continued to manifest towards him to the close of life.
There was in Tasso--conscious as he must have been of his powers, and
confident as he must have felt in the exercise of his own judgment--a
readiness to submit to learned and candid criticism, and a willingness
to concede to dissentient opinions on minor points of taste, so far as
was consistent with manly independence,--which can rarely be found among
men of first-rate talents, but yet might be expected from a court poet,
accustomed in other matters to defer to superiors, be compliant towards
equals, and condescending to inferiors. This disposition, however, which
ought to have conciliated envy herself, only provoked her the more to
assume every shape of candour or malignity, as best suited her humour,
to torment and distract him, that she might revel over his wretchedness,
if she could not accomplish his fall. Years intervened while the
"Gerusalemme Liberata," in its finished form, was undergoing as many
ordeals almost as he had friends, and its author suffering almost as
many martyrdoms as he had enemies. Into the particulars of these
persecutions it is not necessary to enter here. The poet was certainly
induced by the force of arguments used by some, and the terror of
inquisitorial powers exercised by others of his critics, to alter,
expunge, and amend many parts of the poem, which, after all, suffered
little from the processes to which it was thus exposed before its
publication. That publication, however, was long delayed by such
vexatious hinderances, and at last was effected surreptitiously, to the
great offence and injury of the author, then in confinement as a
lunatic.

Tasso's malady was grievously aggravated by these excruciating
criticisms, when he found himself, on the one hand, charged with heresy
against Aristotle and good taste, and, on the other, with heresy against
the church and good morals. Fevers, headaches, strange dreams, waking
suspicions, restlessness, disappointment, dissatisfaction with his
patron, to whom he had dedicated his poem, and in honour of whom he had
created his imaginary hero, Rinaldo,--perhaps, too, the bitterness of
desponding passion, though that is questionable,--suggested to him the
idea of absconding from Ferrara and taking refuge at Rome, where he
purposed to bring out the "Gerusalemme," at his own pleasure, and hoped
to reap a considerable pecuniary benefit from the sale. Alfonso,
however, was not willing to lose the glory of the dedication to himself,
though he seems to have wanted the generosity, the humanity, the justice
to deal with the author except as an impotent creature in his power, who
could do him much honour by flattering his pride, but to whom he showed
at best but stinted kindness. To secure his selfish object, he made the
poet a prisoner near his own person,--both at Ferrara, and at his palace
of Belriguardo in the country,--a prisoner at large, indeed, but under
perpetual observation. Of this the sufferer was aware; and the very idea
of a human eye for ever upon him, restraining his looks, words, and
actions, poring over him while he slept, haunting his dreams, and
entering into his very thoughts--for so he must have felt as though it
did--this alone was enough to madden a man of iron heart and millstone
brain, much more a poor hypochondriac, as Tasso had already become.

Notwithstanding the jealousies of Alfonso, and the fascinations of his
sisters to detain him, the capricious bard escaped from his splendid
captivity to Rome,--and escaped even with the permission of the duke;
who gave him a letter of recommendation to the cardinal Hippolyto, to
befriend him as a stranger there, for the avowed purpose of obtaining
the accustomed indulgence granted to visiters during the jubilee. Here
he met with the cardinal Ferdinand de' Medici, afterwards grand duke of
Tuscany, who renewed to him in person the tender of an honourable asylum
(formerly intimated to him in private), should he be disposed to leave
altogether the service of Alfonso. The offer was gratefully
acknowledged, but not formally accepted; and after six weeks of holidays
(as he felt them to be) spent in the luxury of literary intercourse, and
the renewal of the impressions which the scene of Rome's posthumous
glory in her magnificent ruins, and her not less imposing revival in her
hierarchal pomp, had left on his mind in youth, he returned by way of
Sienna and Florence to Ferrara. Here, while his poem was going through a
second round of critical purgatory, and his soul was sinking under the
burden of censures laid upon him, like the spirits of the proud in
Dante, condemned to bear enormous stones along the uneven uphill road,
he received the appointment of historiographer to the house of Este,
with a small stipend, which laid upon him another cobweb obligation to
remain at Ferrara. What were the duties of this office it is of no
consequence to inquire; he does not seem even to have performed any, nor
perhaps did he owe any; his fable of the origin of that family from his
hero Rinaldo--the Rinaldo of his "Gerusalemme"--had already conferred on
it more of that glory which princes covet, than the true history of all
its ancestors might have done. When the results of the aforesaid second
revisal of his poem were communicated to him, in despair of conciliating
his critics, and determined not to yield altogether to their incompetent
authority, on points where he felt himself strong in poetical power to
produce the very effects which they deprecated, but which he had aimed
at and achieved most triumphantly, he composed an interpretation of the
whole as an extended allegory, spiritualising its heroes and its scenes,
with more perverse ingenuity than felicity of success. Of this it may be
fairly said, that if the original were mainly fiction, the moral was
wholly so. His censors, however, persisted in condemning the voluptuous
passages to which he himself was most attached, because he knew them to
be the most beautiful, and recked not that they were the most seductive.
In this respect the poet himself was the Rinaldo of his sorceress muse,
who by her enchantments had wholly captivated his heart, and carried him
away to her "limbo of vanity;" from which Sperone and Antoniano, his
remorseless critics, in vain endeavoured to deliver him; as Carlo and
Ubaldo had rescued his hero from the thralls of Armida in her island of
sensual delights. He never yielded all, though he conceded many things,
and sacrificed several extravagant inventions, by which the poem, was
rather mended than mutilated.

An incident occurred about this time, which exhibited Tasso not less in
the character of a hero than he had hitherto figured in that of the
laureate of heroes. Suspecting one of his friends to have been guilty of
opening his trunks with false keys, to pry into his secrets among his
papers, he gently remonstrated with the offender, who resented the
charge by giving him the lie, and received in return a blow upon the
face. This rencontre took place in the court of the palace, and was
therefore sufficiently notorious. The cowardly aggressor--one Maddalo, a
notary--walked away with the dishonour on his brow, but meditating in
his heart the most atrocious vengeance. Accordingly, having enlisted
three of his kindred in the quarrel, they sallied forth, armed, to
assail the poet; and finding him abroad in the street, they fell upon
him from behind. Tasso promptly turned round, drew his sword, and dealt
so dexterously with it, that the ruffians were soon put to flight;
though their fears of being apprehended, no doubt, to their "speed lent
wings," till they found refuge under the roofs of various friends. The
circumstance gained him no small reputation, and gave rise to a couplet
which was often repeated:--


"Con la penna e con la spada
Nessun vai quanto Torquato."

"With the sword and with the pen,
Tasso beats all other men."


It is not practicable, in this succinct memoir, to trace the sufferer
through all the details which have been recorded of his miseries from
penury, pride, ambition, and disappointment, the wrongs inflicted on him
by patrons and rivals, and above all, those growing symptoms of a mind
diseased, occasioning suspicions, jealousies, misunderstandings, and
quarrels with his friends and contemporaries; while that insidious
malady, which no medicine can reach, was making its unchecked ravages
upon his constitution, and inveterately fixing upon him its evil
influences, so that, with brief and distant lucid intervals, his
remaining days were passed in horror and despondency, whether amidst the
darkness of the dungeons of Ferrara, or wandering amidst the broad
sunshine on foot, and depending for bread and shelter upon casual
hospitality, from province to province throughout Italy. Imagining that
his enemies--enemies as imaginary, in this case, as were his fears of
them--had accused him to Alfonso of treason, and to the pope of heresy,
he at length grew so outrageous, that, one day, for some unaccountable
provocation, he drew a dagger upon a servant, and assaulted him in an
apartment of the duchess of Urbino. Being instantly disarmed, he was
confined, by order of the duke, within the precincts of the palace.
Here, when for the first time he found himself a prisoner, he was
overwhelmed with anguish, and bitterly bewailed his fate. As soon as he
could again command his passion, he wrote a very penitential letter to
Alfonso, suing for pardon and release. Both were granted to him; and he
was removed, under the eye of the duke himself, to the palace of
Belriguardo, in the country, that he might recover his health and
spirits, amidst scenes and with the society in which he had formerly
delighted to be placed. With a delicate regard to one of his most
grievous temptations--that he had been guilty of heresy, Alfonso
introduced to him the head of the holy inquisition at Ferrara, who,
after duly examining him, fully absolved him from all imputations of the
kind, and assured him that he was yet a good catholic. Not contented
with this, he suddenly left Belriguardo, and took refuge in a convent of
St. Francis, from which he sent word to his patron, that as soon as he
should be sufficiently restored he intended to enter himself among the
fraternity. But nothing could calm the troubled waters of his mind; he
still conceived himself under the displeasure of the duke, and that his
acquittal by the inquisitor was invalid. In this turmoil of doubts and
self-reproaches, he importuned Alfonso and the duchess of Urbino with
letters concerning his imaginary offences, and imploring comfort and
assurance which they could not give, because he would not receive. With
Leonora he appears never to have had that freedom and frequency of
correspondence which he had hitherto been permitted to hold with her
elder sister. Whether this be in favour of his presumed passion or not
must be left to those who are skilled in the mysteries of love-making
between unequal parties. On this subject, as on the poet's strange
melancholy, and the severity with which it was visited by his patron,
whether for the punishment of the lover or the cure of the maniac, it
would be futile to argue here. After all the explanation and
mystification by Tasso's biographers, the general impression has been,
is, and probably will remain, that his love for Leonora was real; that
his imprisonment was vindictive on the part of her brother, and that his
frenzy was the effect of hopeless passion and impotent resentment
against oppression. "Historians," says Ugo Foscolo, "will be ever
embarrassed to explain aright the reasons of Tasso's imprisonment: it is
involved in the same obscurity as the exile of Ovid. Both were among
those thunder-strokes that despotism darts forth. In crushing their
victims they terrified them, and reduced spectators to silence. There
are incidents in courts, that, although known to many persons, remain in
eternal oblivion--contemporaries dare not reveal, and posterity can only
divine them."

In the following summer, Tasso, bewildered and desperate, and not
knowing whither to turn, or in whom to confide, at length fled secretly
from Ferrara to visit his sister at Torrento, whom he had not seen since
they were children together. She was now a widow, the mother of two
sons, and dependent upon her uncles, who still withheld her mother's
dowry, for the means of subsistence. With that caution to do every thing
by stealth, which characterises the hallucination of one who fancies all
the world conspiring to do him harm, he presented himself before her in
the habit of a shepherd, affecting to be the bearer of certain letters
from himself. He found her alone; her children being absent. The letters
represented her brother at Ferrara as surrounded by enemies, and in the
most imminent danger of his life, unless she interposed in his behalf,
and rescued him from their machinations. When she had read the
distressing intelligence, she implored the supposed messenger to tell
her all, the worst, at once. He answered by a recital of miseries so
aggravated, in a tone so earnest and impassioned, that, whether she
suspected him or not, she fainted with alarm. When she had been
sufficiently recovered, the cunning minstrel changed the hand that
played upon her, like Timotheus on his harp, and, from excess of pity
for her brother's sufferings, gently awoke all her tenderness of
affection, by old and beautiful recollections of former days, and hopes
yet possible to be realised in years to come. At length, when she was
well prepared, he discovered himself fully to her, and they were brother
and sister again in a moment, and thenceforth to the end of life. With
her he remained in comparative tranquillity for several months, being
all the while unacknowledged in the neighbourhood, except as Cornelia's
cousin from Bergamo, who, coming to Rome, had availed himself of the
opportunity to visit her.

But, as might be expected, his self-tormenting mind became unquiet
amidst scenes of repose, which, from day to day, delighted him at first,
but, from day to day, presenting little change of aspect or incident, he
sighed again for Ferrara, choosing rather the agony of life to that rest
which was no longer supportable. Thither, then, he returned, on the
assurance of pardon from the duke, and the restoration of his papers. It
was soon after his arrival, that an act of indiscretion attributed to
him by some, and denied by others of his biographers, is said to have
caused him to be put in ward as a person of deranged intellect. Being in
company with Alfonso and his sisters, in the presence of the court, in
reply to a question from Leonora, Tasso gave her an involuntary salute,
their faces being so near together that he felt attraction to be
irresistible. The duke, astonished and indignant, turned to his
attendants and exclaimed, "See to what a lamentable condition this great
man has been brought by the loss of his reason!" But the date of this
circumstance happens to be as disputable as the fact; for it is certain
that the poet had not long resided at Ferrara, when, still unsatisfied
with the duke's conduct towards him, he again withdrew from the city,
and successively sought temporary refuge at Mantua, Urbino, Florence,
Padua, Turin, and Venice. Being ill at ease every where, by a fatality
of instinct, as it might be deemed, he returned to Ferrara, and thence
departed no more till after a confinement of seven years. For, imagining
himself coldly received at court, and unworthily repulsed when he sought
an audience, he vented his anguish of disappointment in bitter
invectives against the duke, who, amidst the festivities of his new
nuptials with a young bride, his third wife, a daughter of the duke of
Mantua, was little inclined to hearken to the complaints and
supplications of one whom he had long looked upon as insane. On this
ground he was committed to St. Anne's hospital, as a lunatic, which in
those days of medical ignorance of the proper treatment of such patients
was to be punished as a criminal for his misfortune. The following
extract must stand in place of multifarious details of the poet's
feelings under this long restraint. His imprisonment commenced in March,
1579. Soon afterwards he thus expressed himself in a letter to his
friend Scipio Gonzaga:--

"Ah me! I had intended to compose two heroic poems of noble argument,
and four tragedies, of which I had contrived the plots. Many works in
prose also, on the most exalted and useful subjects, I had contemplated;
purposing so to unite philosophy and eloquence, that I might leave an
eternal monument to my memory in the world. Alas! I hoped to close my
life with glory and renown, but now, borne down under the load of my
misfortunes, I have lost all prospect of fame and distinction. Indeed I
should consider myself abundantly happy, if, without suspicion, I could
but quench the thirst with which I am tormented; and if, as one of the
multitude, I could lead a life of freedom in some poor cottage, if not
in health, which I can no longer be, yet exempt from this anguish. If I
were not honoured, it would be enough for me not to be abominated; and
if I could not live like men, I might at least quench the thirst that
consumes me, like the brutes which freely drink from stream and
fountain. Nor do I fear so much the vastness as the duration of this
calamity; and the thought of this is horrible to me, especially as in
this place I can neither write nor study. The dread, too, of perpetual
imprisonment increases my melancholy, and the indignities which I suffer
exasperate it; while the squalor of my beard, my hair, and my dress, the
sordidness and the filth of the place, exceedingly annoy me. But, above
all, I am afflicted by solitude, my cruel and natural enemy; which; even
in my best state; was sometimes so distressing, that often, at the most
unseasonable hours, I have gone in search of company. Sure I am, that if
she who so little has corresponded to my attachment, if she saw me in
such a condition; and in such misery, she would have some compassion
upon me."

Though such statements must be received with some allowance for the
power of self-torturing which he possessed in no small degree, and
exercised with as little forbearance as though he were his own most
implacable enemy, yet, according to Tasso's representation, the
treatment which he experienced under the hands of his brother-poet,
Agostino Morti, formerly a disciple of Ariosto, the keeper of the
hospital, was almost as bad as that which he received at his own. He
says that by this man he was not allowed the necessaries of life, the
medicines which his bodily disease required, nor the spiritual
consolations which his heart-sickness needed: moreover, that his
meditations were disturbed by the inmates of the house, so that he could
not proceed with the preparation of his works for the press; but above
all, that he was under the power of witchcraft, Morti being in league
with certain magicians to destroy him by enchantments; and as this was a
capital crime, he threatens to accuse the keeper to the duke.[41] His
sonnets to the cats of the hospital, imploring them to lend him the
light of their eyes to write by, are specimens of that _kind_ of mirth
which suits and sets off melancholy, in a certain "humorous sadness."
Their genuineness, however, is not certain, and they are hardly
translatable.

Whatever were the actual circumstances of Tasso's mental alienation and
corporal sufferings from disease or ill usage, his life, from the period
of his first imprisonment, was to himself like one of _the opium-eater's
dreams_--splendours and horrors, alternations of agony and rapture,
changes sudden, frequent, and strangely contrasted: he inhabited a world
of _unrealities_, of which the joys and sorrows, the hopes and fears,
were the more real in proportion as they were ideal, and therefore
incurable; acting upon the soul itself like that effect upon the bodily
senses, excruciatingly susceptible of impressions of pain, so happily
imagined, and not less felicitously expressed by the most polished of
our own poets:--


"Say what their use, were finer optics given?
To inspect a mite, not comprehend the heaven;
Or touch, if tremblingly alive all o'er,
To smart and agonise at every pore;
Or, quick effluvia darting through the brain,
Die of a rose in aromatic pain;
If nature thunder'd in his opening ears,
And stunn'd him with the music of the spheres.
How would he wish that heaven had left him still
The whispering zephyr and the purling rill."

POPE's _Essay on Man_, Epist. I.


And such a being, too exquisitely sensitive, is every poet, whose
imagination or whose passion overmasters his reason and his judgment.
Tasso was eminently such--a poet in every thing, and all life long.

Meanwhile editions of his "Gerusalemme" were multiplying throughout
Italy, and beyond the Alps and the Pyrenees; while the mind that
conceived and produced it was wandering, like a lost star through the
infinity of space, unaccompanied by any kindred planet, and unattracted
by any parent sun; and the poet himself--he whom monarchs had delighted
to honour, the associate of sovereigns, who had been the favourite of
princesses, and the admiration or the envy of the highest intellects of
his age--was treated as a brute, out of whose living frame the rational
soul had departed, and whose animal appetites were to be subdued by
severe abstinence, or controlled by harsh discipline.

Yet in his solitude, when the first rigours of his imprisonment had been
relaxed, and an apartment of less discomfort was allotted to him, he
pursued, with unabated ardour and intensity, his studies, so far as he
had the means, and poured out, as he was ever wont, his sorrows and his
hopes, his remembrances and his imaginations, in every form of verse.
Indeed, many of his most beautiful compositions are dated within the
term of his captivity. In course of time, as he grew calmer, his
friends, and illustrious strangers attracted by his fame, were permitted
to visit him. Occasionally, too, a day of light and liberty was granted,
and he was brought out of his prison-house to those splendid mansions
which he loved to inhabit, and which he was so well qualified to adorn.
Marfisa of Este, cousin to the duke, especially befriended him in this
manner, and entertained him at her delightful villa, where, in company
with her distinguished household and visiters, he looked abroad again in
sunshine, with all a poet's transport and all an invalid's delight, when
mere existence, void of suffering, is enjoyment.


"See the wretch, who long has tost
On the thorny bed of pain,
At length repair his vigour lost,
And breathe and walk again:
The meanest floweret of the vale,
The simplest note that swells the gale,
The common air, the earth, the skies,
To him are opening paradise."


So sang Gray, and so felt Tasso for a few hours of freedom,--but soon
remanded back to his lonely abode, he relapsed into despondency; and
though one such day, while it lasted, might seem to compensate for all
the past, yet when it was gone, its pleasures appeared too dearly
purchased by the misery of another day rendered more bitter by the
transient change.

Having collected a volume of his fugitive verses, principally composed
in prison, he published it with a dedication to the princesses, the
duchess of Urbino and Leonora; but the latter lived not to receive this
mournful proof of the fidelity of his gratitude, if not of his love. She
died, after a long illness, in 1581, aged 43 years. Tasso enquired
earnestly after her during her sickness, and offered to do any thing in
the power of his muse to beguile that part of her suffering which song
might soothe, while patiently bearing the rest, for which there was no
relief but from Heaven. After her death he became mute on that theme,
which most of his biographers would fain prove to have been the real
though covert one of many an amorous effusion among his sonnets and
lyrics. "Great griefs are silent."

Among his wild imaginations, Tasso thought himself haunted in his prison
by a sprite--something akin to our old English Robin-good-fellow--who
(probably in the very person of his knavish attendant) played all manner
of petty mischievous pranks to plague him. One extract from a letter on
this subject will show how little command of his reason he had at this
time. He says, "The little thief has stolen from me many crowns, I know
not what number--for I do not, like misers, keep an account of them--but
perhaps they may amount to twenty. He turns all my hooks topsy-turvy,
opens my chests, and steals my keys, so that I can keep nothing. I am
unhappy at all times, especially during the night, nor _do I know if my
disease be frenzy, or what is its nature._" Far more frightful
visitations he complains of during this dreadful interval, all which
seem to prove a lamentable derangement of intellect, of which he was
himself sometimes so conscious, that he rouses all his powers of
reasoning to convince himself that he has not really lost his wits. To a
friend he writes--"I cannot defend any thing from my enemies, nor from
the devil, _except my will_, with which I will never consent to learn
any thing from him or his followers, or have any _familiarity with him
or with his magicians._ * * * * Amidst so many terrors and pains, there
appeared to me in the air the image of the glorious Virgin, with her Son
in her arms, encircled with clouds of many colours, so that I ought by
no means to despair of her grace. _And though this might be an illusion,
because I am frenetic_,--troubled with various phantasms, and full of
infinite melancholy,--yet, by the grace of God, I can sometimes
_cohibere assensum_ (withhold my assent), which, as Cicero says, being
the act of a sound mind, I am inclined to believe it was a miracle of
the Virgin."--This vision he celebrates in one of his most brilliant
sonnets, and also in an elegant madrigal, ascribing to her grace the
marvellous cure of his mental affliction.

In whatever way that cure may have been temporarily effected, Tasso,
after more than seven years' confinement, was liberated in 1586, at the
special intercession of the prince of Mantua. Alfonso refused to allow
him an audience, and he left Ferrara like a transport released from
prison, to go into perpetual banishment; for the duke remained
inexorable, and, indeed, implacable, to the end of his victim's life.
For a while Tasso enjoyed the sudden transition, again being lodged in
the palace of Mantua, faring sumptuously, and being admitted to the
high, amiable, and intellectual society of nobles, ladies, and scholars.
This pleasant season was not, however, without relapses of his fearful
disease: the evil spirit came upon him at times, and all the enchantment
of his harp could not drive it away.

During several years afterwards, the poet wandered about, as his father
had done, from city to city, and from court to court, experiencing all
the vicissitudes of what is called fortune, but which, in his case,
appears to have been the lot which he chose and cut out for himself.
Princes were ever ready to open their doors to him, and wherever he was
known, he was honoured according to the reputation which he had so
painfully but unprofitably acquired; his patrons having only afforded
him hospitality while he abode with them, and booksellers having been
enriched at his expense by the spoils of his genius, in a country where
the property of literary men in their own works was little acknowledged
and less respected. His controversy with the _Della Cruscan_ academy
during his imprisonment, the members of which had invidiously prejudiced
the public mind against him, the living, whom their favour might have
benefited, by exalting Ariosto, the dead, whom their preference could
not serve,--while it grievously galled him, rather tended to spread the
knowledge, and, necessarily with that knowledge, the fame of his
"Gerusalemme," than permanently to injure his fair fame. But he himself,
from scruples of conscience and infirmity of mind, became dissatisfied
with it, and employed no small portion of his brief remaining life in
remodelling it, under the title of "Gerusalemme Conquistata,"--a scheme
in which he utterly miscarried. His last great poetical attempt, and
worthy of him in his palmy state, was a work on the creation, entitled
the "Sette Giornate" (the Seven Days), which he left unfinished. It was
composed in _versi scidti_, which nearly correspond to English blank
verse. There are many passages in this magnificent fragment, which were
evidently so familiar to Milton's mind, that he fell into the same
trains of thought, and imitated them in the style peculiar to himself,
repaying as much as he borrowed, "stealing and giving odours."

Tasso, soon tiring of Mantua, and even languishing for Ferrara, though
never permitted to return thither, wore away the residue of his
desultory life, principally at Bergamo, Florence, Rome, and Naples. In
the latter city (his sister being dead), when it was too late for him to
enjoy the possession of it, he recovered his mother's long-disputed
dowry, or such a portion of it as, at an earlier period, might have
rendered him independent of those eleemosynary supplies from precarious
hands, on which he generally subsisted. About the same time the pope
also settled a pension upon him, and consented to allow him the honour
of a coronation, such as had been granted to Petrarch, two centuries
before. But wealth and honour, such as mortal hands could confer or
withhold at pleasure, came too late for him. In his latter years, too,
he became acquainted with Manso, marquis of Villa, his last patron, and
his first biographer; known in this country as, in his old age,
befriending our Milton, then a youth, on his travels in Italy, as, in
his own youth, he had befriended Tasso sinking to the grave under
premature decay.

One of the most remarkable circumstances of the last days of Tasso was
the imagination, that he was occasionally visited by a spirit--not the
mischievous Robin-good-fellow of his prison, but a being of far higher
dignity, with whom, alone or in company, he could hold sublime and
preternatural discourse, though of the two interlocutors none present
could see or hear more than the poet himself, rapt into ecstasy, and
uttering language and sentiments worthy of one who, with his bodily, yet
marvellously enlightened eyes and purged ears, could distinguish the
presence and the voice of his mysterious visitant. Manso gives a strange
account of such an interview, when he himself stood by, yet perceived
nothing but the half-part which the poet acted in the scene.

"One day," says the marquis, "as we were sitting alone by the fire, he
turned his eyes towards the window, and held them a long time so
intensely fixed, that when I called him he did not answer. At last,
'Lo!' said he, the courteous spirit, which has come to talk with me;
lift up your eyes and you shall see the truth.' I turned my eyes thither
immediately; but though I looked as keenly as I could I beheld nothing
but the rays of the sun, which streamed through the window-panes into
the chamber. Meanwhile Torquato began to hold, with this unknown being,
a most lofty converse. I heard, indeed, and saw nothing but himself;
nevertheless his words, at one time questioning, and at another
replying, were such as take place between those who reason closely on
some important subject. * * * * Their discourse was marvellously
conducted, both in the sublimity of the topics, and a certain unwonted
manner of talking, that exalted myself into an ecstasy; so that I did
not dare to interrupt Torquato about the spirit which he had announced
to me, but which I could not see. In this way, while I listened between
transport and stupefaction, a considerable time elapsed; at length the
spirit departed, as I learned from the words of Torquato, who, turning
to me, said, 'From this day forward, all your doubts will be
removed.'--'Rather,' I replied, 'they are increased; for though I have
heard many wonderful things, I have seen nothing to dispel my doubts.'
He smiled, and said, 'You have seen and heard more of him than
perhaps--' here he broke off, and I, unwilling to trouble him, forbore
to ask further questions; as it was more likely that his visions and
frenzies would disorder my own mind, than that I should extirpate his
true or imaginary opinion."

Throughout the year 1594 the poet was so manifestly breaking down, both
in his bodily and mental faculties, that his early dissolution was
anticipated by all his friends. He arrived at Rome on the 10th of
November; when on being introduced to the pope, his holiness, in the
most condescending terms, told him that he intended to bestow upon him
"the crown of laurel, that from him it might receive as much honour as,
in times past, it had conferred on others." The winter proving very
tempestuous, the ceremonial was deferred till the succeeding spring. As
the time approached when all his dreams of ambition were to be thus
consummated, Tasso drooped daily both in spirits and in strength, so
that from the 10th of April, when he was seized with violent fever, no
hope could be entertained of preserving his life. Being informed of his
danger, he thanked the physician for communicating tidings so welcome.
Instead, then, of the vain glories of coronation in this world, he set
himself to prepare, according to his religious views, for his last
change to that eternal state, where nothing could avail him but to have
found that mercy, which is the only hope of sinful man beyond the grave.
On the 25th of April he quietly expired, with the words upon his lips
(of which the last were inaudible), "_Into thy hands, O Lord! I commend
my spirit._" He was aged fifty-one years.

The personal and poetical character of Tasso are so strikingly betokened
in the incidents of his life, that, in a memoir, necessarily so
circumscribed as the present, no further remark on either need be
introduced here. To enter into a critical examination of his writings,
which should at all do justice to their extent, their diversity and
their excellence, of various kinds whether in prose or verse, would
require a distinct essay, equal in length to the whole of this article.
This, however, is little to be regretted, for, of all the Italian poets,
Tasso is the best known in our country; indeed, he has been almost
naturalised, for his greatest work has been oftener translated than any
other continental poem,--so that the style, the story, the sentiments,
the actors, the scenes, the whole fable, with all its embellishments and
adjuncts, are better known to general readers than those of the "Faerie
Queene," and, perhaps, it may be said, than those of "Paradise Lost"
itself, except among that "fit audience," which, "though few," Spenser
and Milton must for ever "find," while English poetry holds its
place--and that the highest, hitherto--in the literature of Christendom.

Besides several inferior versions, those of the "Jerusalem Delivered,"
by Fairfax, Hoole, Hunt, and Wiffin, have each some peculiar merit,
though it must be confessed, that, in each, so far as regards the
diction, that peculiar merit belongs rather to the translation than to
the author, the grace and harmony of whose verse, unsurpassed in his own
language, is absolutely unapproachable in ours. Fairfax's version, in
the original stanza, is masculine and free; Hoole's, in the heroic
couplet, is easy and commonplace, but as a mere entertaining tale, the
most _readable_ of the four; Hunt's, in the same measure, may lay great
claim to indulgence for any defect in vigour, on the score of the
classic taste and learning which it displays. Wiffin's is unquestionably
the best; and it is his own fault that it is not as good as any
reasonable judge could desire a translation of Tasso to be: but, having
chosen to hamper himself, and to encumber his author, with the intricate
stanza of Spenser, containing an extra-Alexandrine line beyond the
Italian octave, he has been compelled to amplify his original _one
eighth_, which must deduct at least in the same proportion from the
compactness, precision, and symmetry of every corresponding section. How
could a master of versification like Mr. Wiffin, himself a genuine poet,
choose to run such a race, carrying such a weight? He has won it,
nevertheless, though not in the style that might have been wished; yet
he that shall hereafter beat him must be a rival, who, beyond the Alps,
would have been a worthy competitor with Tasso himself, had they been
countrymen and contemporaries.


[Footnote 37: The translation is from Dr. Black's valuable Life of
Tasso, from which other occasional quotations may be hereafter made,
with this brief but grateful acknowledgment.]

[Footnote 38: See note, page 117.]

[Footnote 39: It is curious and provoking to observe in how momentary
and contemptible a circumstance originated this enduring injury to the
reputation of one of the greatest poets by one of the greatest critics.
In a note to the clause in Satire IX., Boileau says, "_Un homme de
qualité fit un jour ce beau jugement en ma présence._" So, because "a
fool of quality" ("_un sot de qualité_," as he words it in the verse)
once happened to "say, in the hearing of a wit, that he preferred the
"Gerusalemme" to the "Æneid," "all Europe" has been made to "ring from
side to side," for a century and a half, with the _clinquant_ of Tasso
against the gold of Virgil.]

[Footnote 40: Milton, in the context, has manifestly imitated both Tasso
and Fairfax;--Tasso in the description of the angel's descent, and
Fairfax in the lively circumstance here quoted, and which is not in the
original:--

"On Libanon at first his foot he set,
_And shook his wings_, with rory May dews wet."

The "fragrance" is Milton's own; and here we have the process of one
thought, carried onward by three poets, to consummate beauty and
perfection in the last.]

[Footnote 41: Well might Collins, a kindred spirit, both in his powers
of song and in his "moody madness," thus celebrate the great Italian,
whose "Godfrey of Bulloigne" he only knew through Fairfax's
translation:--

----"In scenes, which, daring to depart
From sober truth, are still to nature true,
And call forth fresh delight to fancy's view,
The heroic muse employ'd her Tasso's art.
How have I trembled when, at Tancred's stroke,
Its gushing blood the gaping cypress pour'd;
When each live plant with mortal accents spoke,
And the wild blast upheaved the vanish'd sword;
How have I sat, when piped the pensive wind,
To hear his harp by British Fairfax strung!
Prevailing poet! _whose undoubting mind_
_Believed the magic wonders which he sung._"

_Ode on the Highland Superstitions._]




CHIABRERA

1552-1637.


Gabbriello Chiabrera was born at Savona, a town on the sea-shore, not
far from Genoa, on the 8th of June, 1552. He was born fifteen days after
his father's death, and his mother, Gironima Murasana, being young when
she was left a widow, married again; which circumstance caused Chiabrera
to be brought up by an uncle and aunt, brother and sister to his father,
who were both unmarried. At the age of nine, his uncle, who resided at
Rome, took him thither, and gave him a private tutor, who taught him
Latin. He was twice during childhood assailed by dangerous fevers, which
left him so weak and spiritless, that his uncle placed him at the
Jesuits' college, that he might regain vigour and hilarity in the
company of boys of his own age. The experiment succeeded, and Chiabrera
became robust and healthy to the end of his long life. During his
juvenile years, his application, memory, and studious habits attracted
the applause of his instructors; and the Jesuits were desirous of
inducing him to become one of them. The youth showed no disinclination;
but his uncle watched over him, and prevented that sacrifice of liberty
and independence, which would have rendered him miserable through life.
When he was twenty this good uncle died; but he had emancipated himself
from monkish influence, and after paying his relations at Savona a short
visit, he returned again to Rome, where coming accidentally into contact
with the cardinal Comaro Camerlingo, he entered his service, in which he
remained some years.

His residence at Rome, however, came to a disastrous termination: he was
insulted by a Roman gentleman, and being forced by the laws of honour to
avenge himself, the consequences obliged him to quit the city; nor was
he permitted to return till eight years after. He now took up his abode
in his native town, and grew to love the leisure and independence of his
life. At one time his tranquillity was disturbed by another quarrel, in
which he was wounded; but with his own hand, as he tells us, took his
revenge. He was forced, on this, to absent himself from Savona; and
remained, as it were, outlawed for several months, when at last a
reconciliation being brought about, he returned and enjoyed many years
of complete tranquillity.

Chiabrera had been born rich, but he was negligent of his affairs, so
that at last his fortune was reduced to a mere competence; and this was
at one time even endangered by a lawsuit at Rome, all his property there
being confiscated; but it was returned to him, through the intervention
of cardinal Aldobrandini. At the age of fifty he married, but had no
children. With the few interruptions above recorded, he passed a life of
peaceful leisure, content with his fortunes, honoured and esteemed by
every body, and rendered happy by the exercise of his talents and
imagination. While at Rome in his early life, he had cultivated the
friendship of literary men; and during his leisure, on his return to
Savona, he occupied himself by reading poetry as a recreation. His own
genius developed itself as he studied the productions of others. The
Greek poets particularly delighted him; and perceiving how much they
excelled all other writers, he made them his study, till, his emulation
being awakened, he wrote some odes in imitation of Pindar: these being
much admired, he was encouraged to continue, still making the Greek
lyrical poets his models, though he did not confine his admiration to
them only. Homer he preferred to all other writers; he was charmed by
the versification and imagery of Virgil; and appreciated in Dante and
Ariosto, the power which they possessed of felicitously describing and
representing the objects which they desire to bring before their
readers.[42]

Chiabrera had the ambition of forming a new style; as he expressed it,
he meant to follow the example of his countryman, Columbus, and to find
a new world, or be wrecked in the attempt. His wish was, to transfuse
the spirit of the Greeks into the Italian language. He perceived that
the fault common to the poets of his day, was a certain cowardice of
style, and an obedience to arbitrary laws, which limited and chilled the
poetic fervour. He shook off these trammels, and adopted every possible
mode of versification, and even bent the dialect of Petrarch and Tasso
to new and unknown forms of expression. He was no lover of rhyme,
preferring to it a majestic harmony in the arrangement of syllables and
sound, which he found more musical and expressive than the mere jingle
of a concluding word. His style thus became at once novel and exalted.
He adorned his verses with pompous epithets and majestic turns of
expression: he was harmonious and dignified, fervent and spirited.[43]

As he dedicated nearly the whole of his long life to the composition of
poetry, he has left a vast quantity, much of which has never been
printed,--narrative poems, dramas, odes, canzoni[44], sonnets, &c.; but
his canzoni, or lyrics, far excel all the rest. This results from his
style being at once more original and beautiful than his ideas. We are
apt to say, as we read, we have seen this before, but never so well
expressed. He does not, like Petrarch, anatomise his own feelings, and
spend his heart in grief: even in his love poetry, while he complains,
he does not lament, and there is a sort of laughing and vivacious grace
and a liquid softness diffused over these poems in particular, which is
infinitely charming. One of his most celebrated, beginning--


"Belle rose porporine,"


is in praise of his lady's smile. It is impossible for any thing to be
more airy and yet heartfelt--he speaks of how the earth is said to
laugh, when, at the morning hour, a rivulet or a breeze wanders
murmuring amid the grass, or a meadow adorns itself with flowers;--how
the sea laughs, when a light zephyr dips its airy feet in the clear
waters, so that the waves scarcely play upon the sands;--and how the
heavens smile when morning comes forth, amidst roseate and white
flowers, adorned in a golden veil, and moving along on sapphire wheels.
"When the earth is happy," he says, "she laughs; and the heavens laugh
when they are gay: but neither can smile so sweetly and gracefully as
you." The flowing measure, the admirable selection and position of the
words render this and other similar poems models of lyrical composition.
A fairy-like colouring, and a thrilling sweetness, like the scent of
flowers, invest them, and render them peculiar in their aerial vivacity
and spirited flow.

These lighter and more animated productions have not been translated;
but, as a specimen of his more serious style, we select one of the
epitaphs or elegiac poems among those which Mr. Wordsworth has
translated, with his usual accuracy and force of diction:--


There never breathed a man who, when his life
Was closing, might hot of that life relate
Toils long and hard. The warrior will report
Of wounds, and bright swords flashing in the field,
And blast of trumpets. He, who hath been doom'd
To bow his forehead in the court of kings,
Will tell of fraud and never-ceasing hate,
Envy, and heart-inquietude, derived
From intricate cabals of treacherous friends.
I, who on shipboard lived from earliest youth,
Could represent the countenance horrible
Of the vexed waters, and the indignant rage
Of Auster and Boötes. Forty years
Over the well-steer'd galleys did I rule:
From huge Pelorus to the Atlantic pillars,
Rises no mountain to mine eyes unknown;
And the broad gulphs I traversed oft and oft;
Of every cloud which in the heavens might stir
I knew the force; and hence the rough sea's pride
Avail'd not to my vessel's overthrow.
What noble pomp, and frequent, have not I
On regal decks beheld! Yet in the end
I learn that one poor moment can suffice
To equalise the lofty and the low.
We sail the sea of life--a _calm_ one finds,
And one a _tempest_--and, the voyage o'er,
Death is the quiet haven of us all.[45]


The tranquil life of Chiabrera was agreeably varied by his love, not
exactly of travelling, but of visiting the various cities of Italy, and
by the honours paid him by its princes, in recompence for his poetry,
which was enthusiastically admired by all his countrymen. He never made
any long stay away from home, except at Genoa and Florence, and there he
possessed friends who were glad to welcome him; for if he was of an
irascible, he was of a placable disposition, and though serious of
aspect, he was gay and good-humoured in society. The grand duke of
Tuscany, Ferdinand I., held him in high esteem, and employed him in
arranging various dramatic representations on the marriage of Mary de'
Medici with the king of France. Charles Emanuel, duke of Savoy, made him
generous offers of remuneration, if he would take up his abode at his
court; but Chiabrera wisely preferred his independence. It has been
mentioned that he arranged the interludes of a comedy of Guarini, when
it was represented on occasion of the marriage of the son of the duke of
Mantua with a princess of Savoy. All these princes rewarded him with
gifts, or honours, which he seems to have set a still higher value upon;
lodging him in their palaces, sending their carriages for his
conveyance, and permitting him to remain covered in their presence. He
had been the intimate friend of cardinal Barberini, and when the latter
was created pope, under the name of Urban VIII., Chiabrera often visited
Rome, though he would never reside there; and the pope made him priestly
gifts of _agnus dei_ and medallions, and in the year of the jubilee
wrote him a brief, or letter of compliment, similar to those sent to
sovereign princes and men of the highest rank.

Chiabrera was always an orthodox catholic, "a sinner," he expresses it,
"but not without Christian devotion. He had Santa Lucia for his
advocate, and during a space of sixty years, he never failed twice a day
to devote himself to pious thoughts, which continued uppermost in his
mind all his life." His moderate desires and temperate habits assisted
to preserve him in uninterrupted good health. He died at the advanced
age of eighty-six, and was buried in his own chapel in the church of San
Giacomo.


[Footnote 42: Vita di se stesso.]

[Footnote 43: Muratori.]

[Footnote 44: There is no English word that gives the exact idea of a
canzone; we call such lyrical poems; yet in Italian they form a class
apart.]

[Footnote 45: _Per il Signor Giambattista Feo._

Uomo non è, che pervenuto a morte
Non possa raccontar della sua vita
Lunghi travagli. Il cavalier di Marte
Dirà le piaghe, e lo splendor de' brandi,
Ed il suon delle trombe: il condannato,
Nelle gran Reggie, ad inchinar la fronte,
De' Re scettrati, narrerà le frodi,
Le lunghe invidie, ed i sofferti affanni
Infra le schiere de' bugiardi amici.
Io, che mi vissi in su spalmate prore,
Potrei rappresentar l' orribil faccia
Del mar irato, ed i rabbiosi sdegni
E d'Austro e di Boöte. Anni cinquanta
Commandai su galere a buon nocchieri:
Dal gran Peloro all' Atlantei colonne
Non sorge monte a gli occhi miei non noto,
E gli ampj golfi veleggiai più volte:
D' ogni nube, che in ciel fosse raccolta,
Seppi la forza, onde marino orgoglio
A' legni miei non valse fare oltraggio.
Che nobil pompa non mirai sovente
Su regie poppe? E pure io provo al fine,
Che le disuguaglianze un' ora adegua.
Tutti quaggiuso navighiamo in forse.
Altri ha tempesta, ed altri ha calma, e poscia
Nel porto della Morte ognun dà fondo.]




TASSONI

1565-1635.


Alessandro Tassoni was born at Modena, in 1565, of a noble and ancient
family. He was so unfortunate as to lose both parents in early
childhood; nor had he any near relative to watch over his tender years
and guard his interests. In consequence, scarcely had he emerged from
boyhood, than his inheritance was attacked by lawsuits, and he was
involved in the most annoying struggles with private enemies, while long
and painful illnesses unfitted him to cope with these evils. Still a
love of knowledge rose above the multiplied disasters that beset him,
and from his earliest years he was a student. He learnt the Greek and
Latin languages under Lazzaro Labadini, a learned and worthy man, but
somewhat of the Dominie Sampson species: simple-hearted and abstracted,
he was exposed to ridiculous mistakes; and his pupil records in his
celebrated poem, how, when a servant informed him of the death of a cow,
he sent to the apothecary's shop for drugs to cure her.[46] While yet
under this master's tuition, he wrote a Latin poem named Errico, which
displayed an extraordinary smoothness of versification and command of
language. At the age of eighteen he took the degree of doctor of laws,
and in 1585 he entered the university of Bologna, where he continued
five years, applying himself to philosophy, under the most celebrated
masters. He afterwards studied jurisprudence at Ferrara, and acquired a
reputation for his learning and critical acumen.

It was not till past thirty years of age that he appears to have
seriously entered on the task of bettering his moderate fortunes.
[Sidenote: 1597.
Ætat.
32.]
He visited Rome, and entered the service of cardinal Colonna. He
accompanied his patron to Spain, and two years after was sent by him to
Rome, to obtain permission from pope Clement VIII. to accept the
viceroyalty of Aragon. Succeeding in his mission, Tassoni returned to
the cardinal. It was during these journeys that he amused himself by
composing his "Considerations on Petrarch," which afterwards occasioned
so much controversy. The cardinal sent him again to Rome to manage his
affairs there; but a few years after, for some reason, with which we are
unacquainted, Tassoni quitted his service.

Restored to independence, he visited Naples, and then took up his abode
at Rome. He now published his "Considerations on Petrarch," and his
"Thoughts on various Subjects," which exposed him to the attacks of the
literati of Italy. Tassoni was of a bold and original turn of mind; he
hated literary prejudices, and loved to set himself against received
opinions, merely because they were supported by the greater number. Thus
he attacked Homer, Aristotle, and Petrarch. He was singularly acute in
discovering minor defects, and his sarcastic and witty talent rendered
his criticisms doubly poignant. He was attacked for his publications and
he replied with a mixture of humour and bitterness peculiarly galling.

He had thus become well known in Italy, when his reputation was raised
to its highest pinnacle by the "Secchia Rapita," or Stolen Bucket, a
serio-comic or mock-heroic poem, the first of the kind that had
appeared. A work of this nature is adapted only to the very region in
which it is composed; and even then, there are certain minds which never
relish travesti. How much more is Hudibras spoken of than read, and to
how many, except in select and peculiar passages, does it prove heavy
and tedious. To an English reader the "Secchia Rapita" must appear
greatly inferior to the work of Butler; it is coarser and more
long-winded; besides that the rhymes, the wrenching and transformation
of language, the vulgarisms and idioms fall coldly on the ears of those,
who have not been habituated from infancy to their use or abuse.

The "Secchia Rapita" is founded on those petty wars between two towns,
so common in Italy in the 14th and 15th centuries. The people of Modena
had, in 1325, discomfited the Bolognese at Zoppolino, and the vanquished
fled with such precipitation, that their pursuers entered their town
with them. The Modenese were driven out again, but carried off, as token
of their triumph, the bucket belonging to the public well of the city.
The Bolognese made an expedition to recover it, and this forms the basis
of the poem. The plebeian names of the "unwashed artificers" who compose
the several armies, their ridiculous proceedings, their combats, mocking
those of belted knights, are all infinitely relished by the Italians.
Tassoni is praised also for the various fancy he displays in
individualising the combatants, their combats, and the modes by which
they die, as well as for the dignity with which he invests the really
noble personages who take a part in the warfare. There are episodes
also, some more dignified, others more burlesque even than the main
subject of the poem; the gods and goddesses take part, and the kings of
Naples and Savoy are brought in on either side. The chief satire of the
poem falls on an unfortunate count di Culagna, under which name Tassoni
held up to ridicule count Paolo Brusantini, a noble of Ferrara, who had
provoked him by instigating a violent and infamous attack on one of his
works. Tassoni was unable to avenge himself openly, as Brusantini was a
favourite of his prince, but vowed future vengeance, and writing to a
friend he exclaims, "If God lends me life, he shall learn, in one way or
another, that he has furnished a work to the devil." The count di
Culagna falls in love with the Amazon of the poem, and resolves to
poison his wife: he makes a confidant of one Titta, a Romagnole, a
courtier of the papal court, who was in fact the lover of the countess,
and betrays to her the murderous design. The lady accordingly deceives
her husband, changes her soup plate with him, and then flies to the tent
of Titta. The count's physician, however, who had been applied to for
poison, has only furnished physic, and Culagna recovers. He hears of the
infidelity of his wife, and defies Titta to mortal combat. Titta is not
brave, but Culagna is trebly a coward. When his challenge is accepted,
he takes to his bed, makes his will, and declares that he is going to
die. His friends cannot inspire him with any valour, but his doctor, by
administering three or four large cups of wine, imparts the necessary
courage. The opponents meet; Titta's spear strikes the throat and chest
of the count, who falls to the ground, and is carried to his tent, to
bed, while Titta exults in his overthrow and death. The surgeon visits
Culagna's wound; but, to the surprise of all, the skin even is not
scratched: "Yet I saw something red," cries the count, "it was assuredly
my blood!" On this they examine him with more attention, and discover a
red riband hanging from his throat to his girdle. The blow of Titta
disordering his dress, had exposed this unfortunate silk of sanguineous
hue to the eyes of the frightened combatant, who at once believed that
he had received a mortal wound. Now, perceiving how he had been
deceived, the count thanked God most fervently, and, in his artless,
pious gratitude, pardoned his friend and his wife all the injuries they
had done him. Such is the outline of the principal episode of the
"Secchia Rapita," which concludes by a peace brought about by the pope's
legate; the bucket remaining, however, with the Modenese; and there it
probably is to this day. Goldoni saw it, in 1730, suspended by an iron
chain from the belfry of the cathedral.

This poem was hailed with rapture, even in manuscript: for some time,
indeed, it was only known thus, and numerous copies were made at the
price of eight crowns each. As Tassoni had not spared his countrymen or
his contemporaries, great obstacles were thrown in the way of its
publication; and even when printed at Venice and Padua, no edition was
really on sale till 1622, when it was published at Paris, under the
inspection of Marini.

Tassoni's slender fortunes meanwhile did not permit him to preserve his
independence: he accepted the offers of Charles Emanuel, duke of Savoy;
but scarcely had he entered on his new service, than a series of
persecutions was commenced against him, which ended by his taking refuge
in private life.
[Sidenote: 1625.
Ætat.
50.]
Again free from all slavery, disgusted by the inconstancy of men and the
intrigues of courts, he took up his abode at Rome, where he had a house
and vineyard, giving himself up to the enjoyment of solitude and study,
and deriving his chief pleasure from hunting and the cultivation of
flowers. Still he was not wholly weaned from the world, nor content to
be neglected: he said that he reminded himself of Fabricius expecting
the dictatorship; and to follow up this truly mock-heroic similitude, he
accepted the offer of cardinal Ludovisio, nephew of pope Gregory XV.,
and entered his service, in which he remained till his patron's death.
He afterwards returned to his native town, and being taken into favour
by its reigning prince, he passed the remnant of his life prosperously,
under the shadow of that fame, which his works, his arduous studies, and
great talents caused to gather thick around him. After a few years spent
in peace and honour, he died on the 5th of April, 1635, in the
seventy-first year of his age.


[Footnote 46: La dove il Labadin, persona accorta,
Fe' il beverone alla sua vacca morta.]




MARINI

1569-1625.


Giambattista Marini was born at Naples on the 18th of October, 1569. His
father, a celebrated jurisconsult, was desirous of bringing up his son
to the same profession; but the youth felt an unconquerable distaste to
the career of the law. Marini possessed a fervid and lively imagination,
and a facility in the composition of poetry which determined, without a
question, his destiny in life. There are many poets even, we may say, of
a higher class than Marini--many more sublime, more earnest, more
pathetic--but, in his degree, Marini is a genuine poet, and gave himself
up with confidence and ardour to the pursuit of that fame of which he
reaped so large a harvest. His father, angry at his resistance to his
wishes, was doubly indignant when he gave open testimony of his new
career, and actually published a volume of poetry: he turned him from
his house, and refused to supply him with the necessaries of life.

But Marini was born under a more fortunate star than usually smiles upon
men who give themselves to the fervent aspirations of genius. Amiable
and generous as he was, he did not possess that stern independence of
disposition, nor that self-engrossed intensity of feeling, which often
render poets an intractable race. Several noblemen stepped forward to
assist and patronise the young adventurer in the groves of Parnassus.
[Sidenote: 1589.
Ætat.
20.]
The duke of Bovino, the prince of Conca, and the marquess of Manso, the
friend of Tasso, offered him protection and shelter. He became
acquainted with Tasso, who encouraged him to pursue his poetic career;
and he published his Canzoni de' Baci, which acquired for him a great
reputation.

He was concerned in some youthful scrapes; and having assisted a friend
to escape, who had been imprisoned on account of a love adventure, he
was himself thrown into a prison. He amused himself there by writing gay
and light-hearted verses; but soon after he escaped from confinement,
and fled to Rome, where he took up his abode with monsignore Crescenzi.
With him he visited Venice, but returned to Rome after a short absence,
and entered the service of cardinal Aldobrandini. At Venice he published
a volume of lyrical poetry, which established his fame.

Marini was always a popular man, and beloved and esteemed by his
friends. When Paul V. was created pope, his patron, cardinal
Aldobrandini, was sent as legate to Ravenna, and Marini accompanied him.
He frequently visited Venice and Bologna, and formed intimacies with the
men of reputation and talent residing in those cities. He was devoted to
the cultivation of poetry; and here he first conceived the idea of the
"Adone." He accompanied the cardinal to Turin, where Charles Emanuel,
duke of Savoy, received him at his court with the most flattering marks
of distinction. Marini repaid him by a panegyric, which he called "Il
Ritratto" or the Portrait, and was rewarded by the gift of a gold chain,
and made cavalier of the order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus. When
cardinal Aldobrandini returned to Ravenna, the poet was invited to
remain at the Piedmontese court; and, with the consent of his former
patron, he accepted the offer.

Marini's life was chiefly diversified by literary quarrels, in which he
came off with his usual good fortune. He had already sustained several
skirmishes with various authors, when the most deadly war was declared
against him by Gasparo Murtola, a Genoese, and secretary to the duke. He
believed himself to be the first poet of the age, and was indignant at
the favour shown to Marini. He levelled an attack of epigrams and
satirical sonnets against him, which Marini answered, and was considered
to have the best of the battle: they published these collectively
afterwards, under the title of the Murtoleide and the Marineide: but
Murtola, still more angry at the advantages gained by his adversary in
this paper hostility, took a more injurious mode of showing his enmity:
he shot at him as he was walking in the public square, but, missing his
aim, wounded a favourite of the duke who was with him. Murtola was
thrown into prison, and condemned to death. Marini generously interceded
in his favour, and at his solicitation he was pardoned and liberated.
Murtola, more angry and envious than ever, brought forward a poem of his
enemy, which satirised the duke of Savoy. In vain Marini represented
that this work had been written at Naples in his youth, many years
before. He was thrown into prison, nor liberated till the marchese Manso
sent his testimony of the truth of what he had declared, as to the
period of its composition. His tranquillity does not appear to have
suffered by this persecution. He continued to devote himself to learning
and poetry: he applied himself to the study of the Holy Scriptures and
the writings of the Fathers, and published his poem on the Murder of the
Innocents, which he considered his best production.

His fame, spread beyond the Alps, had induced queen Marguerite of France
to invite him to her court. Marini accepted her invitation; but by the
time he arrived in Paris his patroness had died. Queen Mary de' Medici
stepped forward, however, in her room, and the place of gentleman to the
king, with a pension of 2000 crowns, was bestowed on him. He became very
popular among the French nobility; many learnt Italian for the express
purpose of reading his works. He lived a happy and honourable life. His
great pleasure consisted in forming a valuable and extensive library,
and collecting pictures by the best artists. The queen showed him many
marks of favour: if she met him in the street, she was in the habit of
stopping her carriage, for the sake of conversing with him; and such
generosity was shown him by her, and his other noble patrons, that he
was enabled to buy a villa near Naples, on Mon Posilippo, whither he
intended at some future time to retire, and end his days. No doubt, in
the chill climate of Paris, under the dusky atmosphere of the north, his
lively imagination recurred with yearning to the beautiful and genial
land of his nativity.

[Sidenote: 1623.
Ætat.
54.]

He published his "Adone" while at Paris. The popularity of this poem was
extraordinary; nothing was spoken of but it and its author, and the
rapid sale enriched Marini, though it also exposed him to much literary
enmity, and the censures of the church. Italian critics have since
become exceedingly indignant, and consider it the origin of the false
taste, the conceits, and flowery style of the seicentisti. But, while it
must be allowed that the imitators of Marini form a school of poetry
remarkable for its corrupt style, its mannerism, and false and
metaphoric imagery, it is impossible not to admit that the "Adone"
itself is a work of great beauty and imagination: it wants sublimity,
and deep pathos and masculine dignity; but its fancy, its descriptions,
its didactic passages, are animated by the undeniable spirit of poetry.
Marini possessed an extreme ease of versification, and a versatility and
fecundity of style that carries the reader along with it. The "Adone" is
founded on the well-known mythological story of Venus and Adonis. Cupid,
having been chastised by his goddess mother, in revenge, resolves to
wreak on her the miseries of love. He brings the son of Myrrha to the
shores of Cyprus, and while the Queen of Beauty is regarding the
beautiful youth as he sleeps, her wily son pierces her heart with his
love-poisoned arrow. She falls in love on the instant, and Adonis, on
awakening, is not slow to return her passion. Venus conducts him to her
palace, where Cupid relates to him his adventures with Psyche, and
Mercury those of Narcissus, Hylas, Actæon, and other victims of love.
He is then led through the gardens of pleasure, into the tower of
delight; but the loves of the goddess and her favourite are interrupted
by the jealousy of Mars, and Adonis flies in alarm from the angry god.
He falls afterwards into the hands of a fairy, who imprisons and annoys
him: he escapes, and, after many wanderings and adventures, returns to
Venus. It is then that he departs on that fatal hunting expedition which
brings on the catastrophe. Mars and the malicious fairy unite in sending
the hoar against him, by which he is destroyed: his death--the grief of
Venus--his interment--and the combats with which the goddess celebrates
his funeral, conclude the poem. Its chief fault is, that it is terribly
wiredrawn, even in the particular descriptions; for as to the story
itself, that forms but a slender portion of the whole composition.
Besides this, we are told that an allegory of youth is contained in the
temptations, pleasures, and fatal catastrophe of the young lover; and
this, as well as the unreal and fantastic nature of the personages,
deprives it of all vivid interest. It is far removed from the fire of
Ariosto, or the pathos and dignity of Tasso; still it is pleasing,
varied, and imaginative, and but for its length would to this day be a
more general favourite.

The cardinal Ludovisio, nephew of pope Gregory XV., earnestly entreated
Marini to forsake Paris and repair to Rome. The king and queen of France
permitted him to accept the invitation; and he returned to Italy,
unterrified by the accusation that hung over his head, on account of the
licentiousness of his work. He was received at Rome with enthusiasm, and
his society was courted by every person of distinction. Here, as
elsewhere, however, he was involved in literary squabbles; so that at
last he resolved to retreat to the home he had prepared for himself at
Naples. The tribunal, meanwhile, demanded alterations in his poem,
accused of licentiousness and a tendency to impiety. Two of his friends
appeared to answer for him; but he permitted two stanzas only to be
altered. The poem of Marini is certainly in its very texture soft,
effeminate, and amorous; but there are no passages so reprehensible as
many in Ariosto: the "Orlando Furioso" was never denounced; and it is
singular that so pertinacious an outcry should have been raised against
the "Adone."

Its author, however, was not destined to suffer persecution, nor to
enjoy his success for any long time. Soon after his return to Naples, he
established himself at his delightful villa at Posilippo, where his life
came to a sudden close: he fell ill of a painful malady, and died on the
25th of March, 1625, aged fifty-six. He was buried in the cloister of
the Theatin Fathers, to whom he had bequeathed his valuable library.




FILICAJA

1642-1707.


Vincenzo da Filicaja was born at Florence, on the 30th of December,
1642. The families of both his parents were noble; his mother being the
daughter of Christofano Spini, one of the most distinguished families of
Tuscany. His father educated him with care, and he attended the public
schools of Florence. He gave early token of his literary and poetic
genius: his memory was tenacious, and his industry indefatigable; while
the seriousness of his disposition rendered retirement and study natural
and easy to him. Perceiving his inclination for learning, his father
sent him to the university of Pisa, to fit him for pursuing the legal
profession. Filicaja attended the lectures of the professors on this
subject; yet he could not induce himself to bestow his whole time on the
law, but applied himself also to philosophy and theology, and to the
imbuing himself with a perfect knowledge of the Latin and Italian
languages. He was naturally inclined to piety, and spent much of his
time in prayer and devout exercises. His habits were regulated by strict
principles of morality; and so devoted was he to the cultivation of his
intellect, that he always rose two hours before dawn, finding his mind
clearer, and more capable of grappling with the abstruse subjects of his
contemplation, in the early hours of morning.

While yet a student at Pisa, when on a visit to his home during the
vacation, he fell in love; and his poetic talent first developed itself
in verses addressed to the beautiful and noble girl who was the object
of his affection. She died soon after, and he lamented her death in
poetry; but the exact moral discipline to which he subjected his
inclinations reproached him for giving himself up to the influence of
passion; and he burnt all his love poetry, and made a resolution, which
he kept to the end of his life, of dedicating his genius to the
celebration only of moral and sacred subjects.

After a residence of five years at Pisa, having taken the degree of
doctor of laws, he returned to Florence, and was placed under Giovanni
Federighi, a jurisconsult of eminence, that he might add to his
theoretical, a practical knowledge of law. At the age of thirty-two, he
married Anna, the daughter of the marchese Capponi. Soon after his
father died; and, freed from all restraint, he followed the bent of his
disposition, by retiring into the country, where he spent the greater
part of each year in domestic retirement, devoting himself to the
education of his two sons.

Hitherto his poetic merits were unknown beyond the limits of a small
circle of friends; but public events called his genius to higher
flights. The Turkish army overrunning Hungary, laid siege to Vienna, and
filled Christendom with alarm. The enthusiastic piety of Filicaja added
to the natural disquietude inspired by such a disaster; and while the
fate of the war was in suspense, and afterwards, when victory drove the
infidels from the gates of the capital of Austria, he poured out his
terrors and his exulting triumph in odes, which breathe a pure and
elevated lyric spirit.

At the time when he wrote, Italian poetry had received a check from that
unfortunate propensity men have to shackle the free course of genius by
rules and precedent. There was a distinction made between the poetic and
prosaic style; the former was founded upon Petrarch, and it became a law
to use no expressions but such as had his authority. The language of
Italian verse was thus becoming, as it were, a dead idiom; repeating
itself, and incapable of any original expressions. Filicaja disdained
these shackles, and revivified his poetic diction by transfusing into it
many elevated and energetic modes of speech, hitherto reserved for prose
only. Facility, dignity, and clearness are his characteristics; and the
grandeur of his ideas gives force to the originality of his expressions;
which, emanating spontaneously, as they did, from a mind full of his
subject, found an echo in the hearts of his readers.

His friends alone had hitherto been aware of his talent; but the
enthusiasm they felt on reading these spirited odes led them to give
copies; and they got into the hands of those princes who, as the leaders
of the armies against the Turks, were celebrated in them. One of his
finest odes he had addressed to John, king of Poland; who acknowledged
the honour in letters full of praises and thanks. Christina, queen of
Sweden, displayed in a more kind and liberal manner her admiration:
hearing that Filicaja had two sons, she insisted upon providing for
their education; declaring that she would bring them up as her own
children. She showed herself so generous, that the poet was accustomed
to say, that he could not look on his home and family without perceiving
the marks of her favour. While her modesty was such, that she insisted
that her bounty should be kept a secret; declaring she was ashamed it
should be known that she did so little for a man, whom she esteemed so
much; and her benevolence remained unknown till after her death.
Filicaja's life was not, however, wholly prosperous: on the death of
Christina, he became involved in pecuniary embarrassments, and he was
attacked by a dangerous malady. He lost, also, his eldest son, who,
since the queen's death, had been appointed page of honour to the grand
duke of Tuscany. The high opinion entertained of him by Cosmo III.
extricated him from a part of his difficulties. This prince named him to
the command of the city of Volterra. Ancient feuds and old and almost
irremediable abuses of various kinds, afflicted the town; and it
required all the influence which Filicaja obtained by his justice, his
benevolence, and urbanity to put an end to these evils. Volterra enjoyed
tranquillity and plenty under his direction; trade and the arts
flourished; and this venerable city was restored to a portion of its
former splendour: he thus became so dear to the citizens, that they
twice petitioned the grand duke to continue him in the government. Their
request was accorded; and when, at last, he was recalled, he carried
with him the universal regret.

On his removal from Volterra, he was, for two years, governor of
Pisa,--a situation of high trust. On his return to Florence, he filled
several law offices of great power and emolument. He was popular and
beloved throughout: equitable, but benevolent; diligent and
conscientious, his virtues were adorned by his pleasing and affable
manners. His piety caused him to devote much of his leisure to
devotional exercises; and his taste led him to cultivate poetry. His
industrious habits enabled him to compose a great deal when his time was
otherwise much taken up by his public duties. He wrote much in Latin, a
small portion only of which has been published; and it displays a deep
knowledge and command of that language. He employed himself also in
correcting and adding to his Italian poetry. He was a severe critic on
his own works; and yet, mistrusting his judgment, he submitted them to
the further censorship of four selected friends. He was much beloved, as
well as admired, by all who knew him; and belonged to the Della Crusca
academy, and to the Arcadian,--of both of which he was the brightest
ornament. His last work was an "Ode to the Virgin," which occupied him
but a few days before his death. Filicaja was not only devout, but a
rigid catholic. One of the acts of his life previous to entering on a
new career, had been a pilgrimage to Loretto; and, in his dying moments,
a picture of the Virgin excited his pious and poetic thoughts. There is
great spirit and sweetness in this ode, in which he recurs to the love
of his earlier days; and how, on losing the object, he transferred his
devotion, entire and for ever, to the mother of his Saviour.

While thus employed, he was seized by an inflammation of his lungs. His
religious faith supported him in his sufferings, and did not forsake him
to the last. He died on the 24th of September, 1707, at the age of
sixty-five. He was buried in his family tomb in the church of San Piero,
at Florence.




METASTASIO

1698-1782.


Metastasio was of obscure origin. He owed his prosperity, in the first
place, to the talents with which nature had endowed him; and, in the
second, to singular good fortune; while his amiable disposition and
excellent character gave a scope to the course of felicitous
circumstances; which, among men of genius, is frequently checked by
their impetuosity and thoughtlessness, or by the proud sense of
independence attendant upon their organisation. The name of the poet's
father was Felice Trapassi, a citizen of Assisi. His poverty had forced
him to enter into the Corsican regiment of the pope; and he added to his
slender means by acting as copyist. He married Francesca Galasti, of
Bologna; by whom he had two sons and two daughters. Later in life, he
saved money enough to enter into partnership in a shop of _l'arte
bianca_,--a sort of chandler, where maccaroni, oil, and other culinary
materials, are sold. His younger son, Pietro, was born at Rome, on the
13th of January, 1698. The child gave early indications of genius; and
his father resolved to bestow on him the best education in his power;
and placed him, at a very early age, with a watchmaker, that he might
learn a respectable art.

But the boy was born to pursue a nobler career. He was already a poet;
and, when only ten years old, attracted an audience in his father's shop
by his talents as improvisatore. It happened, one summer evening, that
Vincenzo Gravina, a celebrated jurisconsult, and renowned for his
learning and love of letters, was walking with the poet Lorenzini in the
streets of Rome. Passing by Trapassi's shop, he was attracted by the
childish voice of the juvenile poet, who was in the act of reciting
extempore verses. He joined the audience; and, being perceived by
Pietro, the little fellow introduced some stanzas in his praise into his
effusion. Gravina, charmed by his talent and prepossessing appearance,
offered him money, which the child refused. The lawyer continued to
question him, and was so satisfied by the propriety and spirit of his
answers, that he immediately proposed to adopt him as his son; promising
to give him a good education, and to facilitate his career in the same
profession as himself. No objection could be raised to so generous and
beneficent an offer. The boy was not to be taken from his native town,
nor were his duties towards his parents to be interfered with.

One of Gravina's first acts was to change his adopted son's, name from
the ignoble one of Trapassi to the better sounding appellation of
Metastasio, which was a sort of translation of his paternal name into
Greek. Gravina did not delay to cultivate the boy's understanding, so as
to fit him for a literary career. Being an idolater of ancient learning,
his first care was to initiate his pupil in the languages of the writers
of Greece and Rome, and then to imbue him with a knowledge of their
works. Metastasio showed himself an apt scholar: at the age of fourteen
he wrote a tragedy, which, in a letter written in after years, he freely
criticised. "My tragedy of 'Giustino,'" he says, "was written at the age
of fourteen, when the authority of my illustrious master did not permit
me to diverge from a religious imitation of the Greek models; and when
my own inexperience prevented me from discerning the gold from the lead
in those mines whose treasures were but just opened to me." The tragedy,
written thus in strict imitation, is necessarily frigid; nor does the
language bear the stamp of the ease and grace which so distinguished
Metastasio's after writings.

He still continued to improvisare verses in company. This attractive art
renders the person who exercises it the object of so much interest and
admiration, that it is to be wondered that any one who has once
practised it, can ever give it up. The act of reciting the poetry that
flows immediately to the lips is peculiarly animating: the declaimer
warms, as he proceeds, with his own success; while the throng of words
and ideas that present themselves, light up the eyes, and give an air of
almost supernatural intelligence and fire to the countenance and person.
The audience--at first curious, then pleased, and, at last, carried away
by enthusiastic delight--feel an admiration, and bestow plaudits, which,
perhaps, no other display of human talent is capable of exciting. The
youth, the harmonious voice, and agreeable person of Metastasio added to
the charm: yet, fortunately, he gave up the exercise of his power before
it had unfitted him for more arduous compositions. He gives an account
of his success, and his quitting the practice, in a subsequent letter to
Algarotti. "I do not deny," he writes, "that a natural talent for
harmony and rhythm displayed itself in me earlier than is usually the
case; that is, when I was about ten years of age. This strange
phenomenon so dazzled my great master. Gravina, that he selected me as
soil worthy to be cultivated by so celebrated a man. Until I was
sixteen, he brought me forward to improvisare verses on any given
subject; and Rolli, Vanini, and Perfetti, then men of mature years, were
my rivals. Many people tried to write down our effusions while we
extemporised, but with no success; for, besides that they were no adepts
in short-hand, it was necessary to deceive us cleverly, otherwise the
mere suspicion of such an operation would have dried up my vein. This
occupation soon became burdensome and injurious to me; burdensome,
because I was perpetually obliged, by invitations which could not be
refused, to task myself every day, and sometimes twice a day,--now to
gratify some lady's whim, now to satisfy the curiosity of some high-born
fool, and now to fill up a blank in some grand assembly,--losing thus
miserably the greater part of the time necessary for my studies. It was
injurious, because my weak and uncertain health suffered. It was
perceptible to every one that the agitation attendant on this exercise
of the mind, used to inflame my countenance and heat my head, while my
hands and extremities became icy cold. Gravina consequently exerted his
authority to prohibit me from making extempore verses,--a prohibition
which, from the age of sixteen, I have never infringed, and to which I
believe that I owe the remnant of reasonable and connected ideas that
are to be found in my waitings." He goes on to state the evils that
result to the intellect perpetually bent on so exciting a proceeding;
when the poet, instead of selecting and arranging his thoughts, and then
using measure and rhyme as obedient executors of his designs, is obliged
to employ the small time allowed him in collecting words, in which he
afterwards clothes the ideas best fitted to these words, even though
foreign to his theme: thus the former seeks at his ease for a dress
fitted to his subject; while the latter, in haste and disturbance, must
find a subject fitted to his dress.

On withdrawing his pupil from the exercise of this fascinating art.
Gravina became aware that his education could not be carried on with
success amidst the pleasures and idleness of his life at Rome; and he
sent him to study under his cousin Camporese, who lived near the ancient
Cortona, a town of Magna Græcia, famous in antiquity for its schools of
philosophy. Metastasio was very happy at this period of his life; and,
in a letter written at an advanced age, he recurs to it with yearning
fondness. "Of how many dear and pleasing ideas, my friend," he writes to
Don Saverio Mattei, "you have awakened the recollection, by causing me
to go over in my thoughts the happy time I spent, not less usefully than
delightfully, between boyhood and adolescence, in Magna Græcia. I saw
again as if they were present all those objects which pleased me so much
at that time. Again I inhabited the little chamber, in which the sound
of the breakers of the neighbouring sea so often lulled me into the
sweetest sleep; and, by force of my imagination, I revisited in my boat
the shores of neighbouring Scalea; and the names and aspects of many
places recurred to me, before forgotten. I heard again the venerable
voice of the renowned philosopher Camporese; who, stooping to instruct
one so young, led me, as it were, by the hand among the vortexes of the
then reigning Descartes, of whom he was a strenuous advocate, and
attracted my boyish curiosity, by showing me in wax, as if in a game,
how globules were formed from atoms, and filling me with admiration of
the bewitching experiments of philosophy. It seems to me as if I again
saw him labouring to persuade me that his dog was formed upon the same
principle as a watch; and that the trinal dimension is a sufficient
definition of solid bodies. And I behold him smile, when, having kept me
long plunged in a dark reverie, by forcing me to doubt of every thing,
he perceived that I breathed again, on his assertion, 'I think,
therefore, I am;' the invincible proof of a certainty which I had
despaired of ever again attaining." Camporese died, unfortunately, in
the midst of these studies, and Metastasio returned to Rome.

[Sidenote: 1718.
Ætat.
20.]

It was soon after his lot to lose his adopted father, Gravina. He
expresses, both in letters written at the time, and in after years, his
deep grief on the death of his benefactor. Gravina kept his word, of
considering him as his son; and, with the exception of a legacy to his
mother, left him heir to all that he possessed, to the amount of about
fifteen thousand crowns. Finding himself thus independent, and even rich
in his own eyes, Metastasio gave himself up to the study of poetry.
Hitherto the rules of Gravina had limited his reading: now he emerged
into freedom; and, having been before allowed only to peruse Ariosto,
among the Italians, he read the "Jerusalem Delivered" for the first
time. He was enchanted by the order and majesty of a single action,
conducted with art, and terminated with dignity. The grandeur of the
style, the vivid colouring and fervid imagination of Tasso, transported
him with delight. Ovid was also an especial favourite; and it is
recorded that he regarded Marini with an approbation which that poet,
indeed, deserves, but of which, as the original corrupter of the Italian
style, and the leader of the degenerate Seicentisti, he is usually
deprived.

Unfortunately, independence and youthful thoughtlessness led Metastasio
into other deviations from Gravina's lessons, less praiseworthy than
reading Tasso. The poet was warm-hearted, hospitable, and gay. He was
surrounded by companions ready to share the pleasures and luxuries which
his money procured; while he believed his future prospects secured by
the promises he received from influential protectors. Two years had not
passed before he was undeceived. He had squandered the greater part of
his fortune; he had made many enemies, and his friends fell off. With a
firmness worthy of his education, he stopped short of actual ruin; and,
disgusted with the society of Rome, and the treatment he had suffered,
he changed, on a sudden, his whole plan of life, following up his new
designs with zeal and perseverance.

"There lived at Naples," says his biographer, Venanzio, "a rough incult
lawyer, called Castagnola, covered with rust and dust, and an enemy to
every thing that was not allied to forensic struggles and turmoils."
Wishing to place a barrier between his will and his inclinations,
Metastasio went to Naples, and chose this man for his master, believing
that his asperity and detestation of poetry would serve to guard him
against having again recourse to an art towards which nature impelled
him. For nearly two years he submitted to the control of Castagnola, and
devoted himself to the severest study. But he was well known at Naples,
and his talents were appreciated. He was perpetually solicited to
compose epithalamiums, theatrical pieces, and occasional verses. He
resisted the temptation as long as he could: at last, commanded by the
viceroy, he consented to write a drama, to celebrate the birthday of the
empress Elizabeth Christina, wife of Charles VI. He, however, obtained a
promise of secrecy, and hoped to conceal his crime from his master. To
accomplish this, he was obliged to steal for his work the hours usually
devoted to sleep; but his natural vein, checked for some time, flowed
with such felicity, that he accomplished his task before the appointed
time. The "Orti Esperidi" charmed his august employer, who bestowed on
it the highest praise, and presented the author with a purse containing
two hundred ducats.

The success of this interlude on the stage confirmed the judgment of the
viceroy. It was admirably set to music, and the decorations were most
splendid. All Naples flocked to the representation--all Naples resounded
with its praises, and every one was eager to thank and applaud the
author. But Metastasio, reluctant to quit his legal studies, shrank from
the censures of his master, and continued to preserve the concealment he
had at first adopted: he even angrily denied the charge when he was
accused of being the writer, and put enquiry to fault; till at last the
discovery was made by the prima donna, Marianna Bulgarelli, usually
called La Romanina, from her native city. She had received the greatest
applause in the character of Venus, in this drama; and her gratitude and
admiration made her eager to learn to whom she owed her success. Despite
all his efforts, she discovered that Metastasio was the author, and she
lost no time in spreading the report throughout Naples.

Castagnola was highly indignant. He treated his pupil with severity and
disdain; while, on the other hand, the Romanina used every argument to
inspire him with self-confidence, and to induce him to follow the career
for which he was formed by nature. He consented at last: he quitted the
angry lawyer, who refused even to listen to his farewell; and, at the
earnest invitation of his new friend, took up his abode at her house.
Marianna Bulgarelli had a society around her of distinguished men and
accomplished artists, and among these Metastasio found every
encouragement to pursue his new career. He studied the science of music
under Porpora, the first composer of the day, and acquired a knowledge
of the art which greatly assisted the melody of his verses; so that, he
tells us, he never wrote any lyrical poetry without imagining an
accompaniment at the same time, which regulated its cadences and
modulated the sounds. His natural inclination led him to desire to write
tragedies; but, on reflection, he found that it was not sufficient that
tragedies should be written, if there were no actors to represent them,
nor an audience which could take interest in the representation. His
association with musical people, and a prima donna, led him to consider
the opera as the natural drama of Italy. Operatic dramas owed their
origin to Florence, the birthplace of so much that is great and
admirable, and were first brought forward in 1594. After that time they
fell into disrepute, till Apostolo Zeno, choosing in ancient mythology
and history the groundwork of his plots, brought out pieces that
acquired great popularity. To this species of composition Metastasio
accordingly turned his thoughts. Marianna encouraged him to proceed;
and, when he received the commission to furnish the Neapolitan theatre
with an opera for the carnival of 1724, she suggested the subject of
"Didone Abbandonata," or the desertion of Dido. In this, she filled the
part of the unfortunate queen; and her dignity, pathos, and musical
powers imparted an attraction to the piece, which filled the audience
with enthusiasm, while her heart warmed with gratitude towards the poet,
whose admirable conception and execution gave a scope to her talents,
before denied to them. The reputation of Dido spread through Italy:
during the carnival of the following year, it was acted at Venice, la
Romanina being still engaged to fill the principal part. Metastasio
accompanied his friend, and wrote, while in that city, another opera,
called "Siroe."

This was the last appearance of Marianna on the stage: she was no longer
young, and retired from her profession. She took up her residence at
Rome, and with some difficulty persuaded her friend to return to his
native city. The two families resided under the same roof--Marianna and
her husband--Metastasio with his father, elder brother, and two sisters.
The relations of the poet were indigent; but he possessed some property,
and his friend was comparatively rich. The household was in common;
Marianna acting as steward and housekeeper, while she still kept her
station beside the poet; encouraging him in moments of despondency;
suggesting subjects for his muse; and displaying, at all times, that
active and generous affection which so distinguished her.

Metastasio did not, however, meet with the encouragement at Rome which
hailed his first exertions. He wrote his drama of "Cato," which was
acted in 1727: but it was not attended with his accustomed success. The
austere character of the Roman hero--the cold loves--and disastrous
ending--displeased the morbid tastes of the spectators, who were unable
to appreciate the simplicity of the plot, or the grandeur of the
sentiments. Metastasio had a true tragic bias for an unhappy
catastrophe; but his audience did not relish it, and, subsequently, he
adapted himself better to their tastes, and his operas have usually the
happy ending, then supposed more consonant to the inherent lightness of
musical dramas, or, probably, to the talents of the singers: as, in our
days, the sublime acting of Pasta has induced composers to bring forward
tragedies of the deepest dye, "Medea" and "Otello," as the subjects best
fitted for their art.

Metastasio was discouraged: he was poor, and he had many enemies at
Rome, who prejudiced the pope against him, and rendered his abode very
disagreeable. At this moment, fortune came to his aid, and his whole
future life became prosperous and stable. In November, 1729, he received
a letter from prince Pio of Savoy, director of the imperial theatricals,
inviting him to become the court poet of Vienna. Apostolo Zeno was at
that time poet laureate to the emperor Charles VI.; but he also, with
praiseworthy liberality, seconded the emperor in his wish to invite
Metastasio to his court; and the way was opened to him by the absence of
envy in one, who might have looked on him as a rival, but who generously
preferred regarding him as a fellow-labourer, or rather, successor, to
his own exertions. Metastasio at once accepted the offer with many
expressions of gratitude. He was allowed to delay his journey to Vienna
till the spring of 1730, and to fulfil his engagement of supplying the
Roman theatre with two pieces for the carnival. These were "Alexander in
India," and "Artaxerxes." The latter was a favourite from the first: the
poet considered it the most fortunate of his productions, and was
accustomed to say that he owed it more obligations than any other of his
dramas; since, even when set to indifferent music, it never failed to
meet with success.

Metastasio thus made his appearance at Vienna, surrounded by the halo of
a recent triumph. He left Rome with pleasure; but he quitted his family
with regret: more than all he must have lamented his separation from his
generous and affectionate friend, Marianna, the encourager of his
youthful timidity, the chief promoter of his fortunate choice of a
profession, and his unwearied comforter during adverse circumstances. He
went to new scenes and to a new people, and adapted himself at once to
the change. He was kindly received by the emperor, and his heart
overflowed with gratitude for his condescension and beneficence.

It is a strange fact, how little we are contented with negative
qualities in our fellow-creatures; and, indeed, how amiability, and even
generosity, become slight in our eyes, if unaccompanied by energy,
independence, and pride. Metastasio was the most amiable of men: his
disposition was affectionate and constant; yet he was derided in his own
time for his courtier-like qualities, and the gratitude he naturally
evinced towards his imperial benefactors; and censured for a coldness of
heart of which we can find no trace in his writings or actions. There is
one circumstance that renders posterity more just, and, in particular,
induces those who write his biography to regard him with a favourable
eye: this is the publication of his letters. We possess a series from
the age of thirty to that of eighty-four, when he died, which let us
into the secrets of his heart, and display his good sense, his friendly
disposition, his justice, and the ready sympathy that he afforded to
those to whom he was attached, in a more undisguised manner than could
be known to his contemporaries. These letters prepossess the reader in
his favour; and, while the biographer finds few events to record, and
little of misfortune or error to mark his pages with high-wrought
interest, he may envy the tranquil career of the fortunate poet, and
wish that fate had made him the friend of such a man.

Metastasio entered on his employments at Vienna in the year 1730, at the
age of thirty-two. He took up his abode in the house of Niccolo
Martinetz, who held a place in the court of the apostolic nuncio, and
with whom he remained to the end of his life. The dramas that he brought
out during the year succeeding to his arrival were eminently successful.
These were "Adriano," and "Demetrio;" and, during the three following,
he wrote the "Olimpiade," "Demoofonte," and "Issipile." Each, as it
appeared, excited still renewed admiration and applause. After the
representation of "Issipile," the emperor broke through his habitual
majestic reserve, and expressed his satisfaction to the poet, who was
enraptured by the unusual condescension. His imperial master soon after
testified his approbation in a more solid manner, by bestowing on him
the place of treasurer to the province of Cosenza in Naples, worth
annually 350 sequins. Unfortunately, the war of the Spanish succession
deprived him of this income, after he had enjoyed it but for a few
years.

The poet's heart and soul were in his profession, and his operas were
written with that fervent and exalted spirit which marks the
compositions of genius; while his modesty engendered doubts concerning
their reception, which were delightfully dissipated by the triumph of
their success. His feelings are all ingenuously expressed in his letters
to Marianna Bulgarelli, who, together with her husband, still remained
at Rome with the poet's family. "I did not believe," he writes, "that I
should have been able to send you the good news I now give--I was so
entirely prepared for the contrary. My _Demetrio_ was brought out last
Sunday, and with so great success, that the old people here assure me
they never witnessed such universal applause. The audience wept at the
Addio--my august master was not unmoved--and, notwithstanding the
respect paid to the imperial presence, the public could not restrain
themselves from giving marks of applause. My enemies have become my
applauders. I cannot express my surprise, for this opera is so
delicately touched, without any of that strong colouring that strikes at
once, that I feared that it was not adapted to the national taste. I was
mistaken--every one seems to understand it, and passages are recited in
conversation, as if it were written in German." While composing the
"Olimpiade," he thus addresses his friend:--"Here is a moral sonnet
which I wrote in the midst of a pathetic scene, that moved me as I wrote
it: so that, smiling at myself, when I found my eyes humid from pity at
a fictitious disaster, invented by myself, I expressed my feelings in
the sonnet I send. The idea does not displease me; and I did not choose
to lose it, as it will serve as an incitement for my piety." The thought
of the sonnet is, that, while he smiles at himself for weeping over
dreams and fables of his own invention, he may remember that every thing
that he fears and hopes is equally fictitious,--that all is false, his
existence a delirium, and his whole life a dream;--and it ends with a
prayer that he may awaken and find repose in the bosom of truth.

Again, he writes, "Will you suggest the subject of an opera? Yes or no?
I am in an abyss of doubt. Oh! do not laugh, and say that the disease is
incurable; for indeed; the choice of a subject merits all this
inquietude and scepticism. It is my lot to be forced to make a choice;
and I cannot avoid it; otherwise I should continue to doubt until the
day of judgment; and then begin again. Read the third scene of the third
act of my 'Adrian;' remark the character which the emperor gives of
himself, and you will see my own.[47] From this you may conclude; that I
know my faults; but not that I can correct them. This pertinacity in a
fault; which torments me without the recompence of any pleasure; and
which I clearly perceive; without being able to remedy; makes me often
reflect on the tyranny which the body exercises over the mind. If my
understanding is convinced, when reasoning calmly, that this excess of
indecision is a troublesome, tormenting, and useless vice, and an
obstacle to the execution of any design, why do I not get rid of it? Why
not abide by a resolution, so often taken, to doubt no more? The answer
is clear; that the mechanical constitution of the soul's imperfect
habitation gives a false colouring to objects before they reach it, as
rays of the sun appear yellow or green or red, according to the hue of
the substance which they traverse to meet our eyes. Hence it is clear,
that men for the most part do not act from reason, but from mechanical
impulse, subsequently adapting, by the force of their understanding,
their reason to their actions, so that the cleverest frequently appear
the most reasonable. Do not get weary, because I play the philosopher
with you; I have none else with whom to play it; and doing it thus by
letter, I call to mind conversations of this kind, which made us spend
so many happy hours together.--O, how much more matter for such has my
experience in the world given me!
[Footnote: July 4.
1733.]
We will again talk on these subjects, if fortune does not, through some
caprice, entangle the thread of my honourable but laborious life."

A few months after fortune cut, rather than entangled, the thread of
these prospects; Marianna died, and, true to her feelings of
friendship[48] to the end, she left the poet heir to her possessions, to
the amount of thirty thousand crowns. Metastasio writes thus to his
brother, on receiving this sad intelligence:--

"In the agitation I feel from the unexpected death of the poor and
generous Marianna, I cannot long dilate. I can only say, that my honour
and my conscience have both induced me to renounce her bequest in favour
of her husband. I owe it to the world to undeceive it from a great
mistake,--that of fancying that my friendship was founded on avarice and
interested motives. I have no right to take advantage of the partiality
of my poor friend to the injury of her husband, and God will by some
other means make up for what I now renounce. I need nothing for myself;
I possess sufficient at Rome to maintain my family in decency, and if
Providence preserves to me my property in Naples, I will give my
relations other marks of my affection, and think seriously of you in
particular. Communicate my resolution to my father, as I have not time
to write to him. Assure him of my intention always to contribute as
heretofore to his comfort, and even to increase my assistance, if my
Neapolitan income does not fail me. In short, make him enter into my
feelings, so that he shall not imbitter them by disapproving of my
honest and Christian determination.

"You will continue to live with signor Bulgarelli, who will, I hope,
display towards you that friendly kindness which my conduct with regard
to him deserves. All will go on as before; only poor Marianna will never
return, nor can I hope for any consolation, and the rest of my life will
be insipid and painful."

"I feel," he wrote to another friend on this occasion, "as if I were in
the world as in an unpeopled solitude; desolate as a man would feel, if,
transported in his sleep among the Chinese or Tartars, he should, on
awakening, find himself among a people whose language, manners, and
customs are alike unknown to him. In the midst of such fancies, so much
reason remains, as permits me to be aware how without foundation they
are, and how produced; but reflection has not yet sufficed to dissipate
them. You will have heard that I have renounced the bequest. I know not
whether this renunciation will be approved of by all, but I know that
neither my honour nor my conscience permit me to take advantage of the
excessive partiality of a woman to the injury of her relations, and that
the want of the riches which I refuse, is more tolerable than the shame
which they would produce in me."

Metastasio was, with his accustomed modesty, disturbed by the fear, lest
his honourable conduct would be disapproved of by his friends and the
world; and he was agreeably surprised when, on the contrary, it met with
the general approbation it deserved. "I should be insincere," he writes
to the same friend, "if, affecting philosophy, I pretended to be annoyed
by the kind approval which my country has universally yielded to my
renunciation of Marianna's bequest. It delights me in the first place,
and like a vow, confirms me in my opinion of the justice of the act; and
in the second, it surprises me, as being the testimony of the affection
of so great a mother for the least of her sons."

This, during the space of ten years, from the time of his first arrival
in Vienna, was the only event that disturbed Metastasio's life. These
ten years are the period during which his poetic powers flourished most
vigorously, and during which his best as well as the greater number of
his works were produced. The favour they met confirmed his situation at
court, while they caused him to labour unintermittingly. It is difficult
to give one not versed in the Italian language a correct idea of the
peculiar merits of his poetry, and the excellences of his dramas. They
are not absolute tragedies: their happy conclusions, the introduction of
airs, and their being compressed into three acts, give them a lightness
and a brevity unlike the heavier march of tragedy. They are to a great
degree ideal, and yet possess the interest which passion and plot,
described and developed with masterly skill, necessarily impart. His
command of language is singularly great, and he adapted poetic diction
to dramatic dialogue with wonderful felicity. A long and profound study
of the genius of his native tongue gave him such extreme facility, that
the perfection of art takes the guise of the most unadorned nature; and
the flow and clearness of his verses so excite our sympathy, as to make
us feel as if the thoughts and sentiments which we find in his pages
were the spontaneous growth of our own minds. The magic of his style
renders sensible and distinct the most delicate and evanescent feelings,
so that it has been remarked[49], that many of the movements of the
human soul, which the ablest writers have scarcely been able to indicate
in prose, and which, from their subtlety, are almost hidden from our
consciousness, are brought home to us in his verses with a lucid
felicity of expression, that leaves no portion of them either obscure or
vague. He thus formed a language peculiarly his own. In his airs the
words flow in so unforced a manner and with such extreme propriety, that
they appear to place themselves: not one can be changed, not one
omitted. There is no pedantry, no affectation; simplicity is his
principal charm; it seems as if a child might utter them,--they are so
unstudied; and yet no other poet possesses to an equal degree the art of
clothing his ideas with the same easy grace.

When we reflect on the singular perfection of his style, we are not
surprised that he preserved it with the most jealous watchfulness. He
was careful not to accustom his mind to the use of any language except
Italian, and never knew more of German than the few words "sufficient,"
as he forcibly expresses it, "to save his life." Many nobles of Vienna
paid him the compliment of learning his language for the sake of
conversing with him, and Italian being in common use among the
well-educated, he did not lose so much as might be expected: yet he must
have felt the privation. He was right, however, in adhering to his
resolution. He was settled at Vienna for life, while at the same time
his present occupation and his future glory depended on his preserving
uninjured that delicacy of taste, and felicity of expression in his
native language, which characterises his compositions. But to return to
his operas.

He himself has said, that if he were forced to select one of his dramas
to be preserved, while all the rest were annihilated, he should fix upon
"Attilio Regulo." The principal action of this play, founded on the
well-known heroism of Regulus, in dissuading his countrymen from an
exchange of prisoners, and his consequent return to servitude and a
cruel death in Carthage, is conducted with dignity and pathos. But the
interest of the piece is somewhat marred by an underplot, and the airs
interspersed are not among his best. Perhaps we are inclined to give the
preference among them to "Themistocles:" the dignity of the subject
raises it to this pre-eminence; but in pathos, tenderness, and
impassioned dialogue, the "Olimpiade" is unequalled. Devoted friendship
forms the action; the personages are placed in the most interesting
situations, and the language is sustained to the height of those
emotions which the clash of heroic feelings would inspire. There are
scenes in "Demofoonte" as fine as any to be found in Metastasio, but
there is a reduplication of plot which mars the unity of the action; as,
after deeply sympathising with the hero in his fears concerning his
wife's fate, through nearly four acts, we are somewhat exhausted, and
cannot well reawaken other sentiments, to mourn over the relationship
that he imagines that he has discovered to exist between them. Voltaire
and others have praised the scene between Titus and Sestus in the
"Clemenza di Tito," as surpassing the representation of any similar
struggle of feeling in any other dramatic poet; and the airs in that
piece are among his happiest compositions. It was the poet's aim and
pleasure, in all his writings, to make virtue attractive, and to paint
patriotism, self-sacrifice and the best affections of the soul, in
glowing and alluring colours. This gives a great charm to his dramas. We
live among a better race, and yet the sorrows and passions and errors of
the personages are represented in a manner to call forth our liveliest
sympathy. A heartfelt pathos reigns throughout, and if passages of
sublimity are rare (though there are several which merit that name), the
elevated moral feeling acts on our minds to prevent the enervating
influence of mere tenderness and grief.[50]

Besides his dramas, Metastasio composed at this period two canzonetti,
which are among the best of his productions. The "Grazie agli inganni
tuoi," or thanks of a lover to his lady for having disenchanted him by
her caprices, is written at once with feeling and spirit. The "Partenza"
is yet more beautiful. It was founded on the unfortunate attachment of a
Viennese nobleman for a public singer, who at last yielded to the
entreaties of his friends, in detaching himself from her, on condition
that Metastasio should write some verses of adieu. The lover must have
been satisfied, and the lady charmed, despite regret, by the passion,
tenderness, and beauty of the poem which celebrates their separation.

Metastasio's tranquil and prosperous life was broken in upon in 1740, by
the death of the emperor Charles VI., who fell a victim to either poison
or indigestion, after eating mushrooms. The poet was unfeignedly
attached to his imperial master, whose moral and religious character was
congenial to his own; and the disturbed state of Europe, immediately
after, added to his regret. This prince had no son, and his daughter,
Maria Teresa, succeeded to him as queen of Bohemia and Hungary. Her
husband aspired to the imperial crown; but the influence of France
caused the duke of Bavaria to be elected, under the title of Charles
VII. This disappointment was not the only misfortune of the queen; the
king of Prussia invaded Silesia almost immediately after her father's
death, and Vienna being threatened with a siege, she was obliged to quit
it, and to take refuge in Presburg. After a reign of four years, Charles
VII. died, and the husband of Maria Teresa, then grand duke of Tuscany,
was elected emperor in the year 1745, under the name of Francis I.: but
the war still continued, and its various success, and the disasters,
with which it was attended, gave the court little leisure or inclination
for amusement, until the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle.

On the death of Charles VI., several of the European sovereigns invited
Metastasio to their courts, and made him advantageous and honourable
offers; but, as Maria Teresa still continued him in the place he held
under her father, the poet felt that fidelity and gratitude alike
forbade him to change masters during her adversity. His naturally
sensitive mind was strongly agitated by the various success of the
empress queen's arms. His susceptibility of disposition did not allow
him to regard the course of events with a stoical eye; and to the
disquietude he suffered is attributed the bad state of health into which
he fell after the year 1745, when he was forty-seven years of age. His
malady was chiefly nervous; hysterical affections, and a rush of blood
to the head, were brought on by the slightest mental exertion, followed
by a total temporary inability to write, or even to think: he was thus
obliged entirely to suspend his poetic labours; and when he forced
himself to them, they bear the mark of a falling off in his powers. It
cannot be doubted that this unfortunate state was brought on in a great
degree by climate. He was a native of Rome, and, till the age of
thirty-two, had resided constantly in the south of Italy. What a dreary
contrast did Vienna present to the enchanting land in which he passed
his youth! The clear skies, the perpetual summer, the cheerful feelings
produced by the habits of a southern life, were injuriously changed for
the gloom of the freezing north. The very precautions which the natives
take to protect themselves from cold during the interminable winters,
the stoves, closed windows, and consequent want of fresh air and healthy
exercise, being in diametrical opposition to the more hardy habits of
southern nations, are injurious to the health and spirits of those who
are accustomed to regard the "skiey influences" as friendly instead of
inimical to their comfort and well-being. Metastasio never left Germany
after he first entered it. A part of his occupation, in the sequel,
became the teaching the archduchesses, daughters of Maria Teresa,
Italian: this was an office he felt that he could not desert, with any
grace, even for a limited number of months. The kindness of the empress
in yielding to the total suspension of all theatrical composition on his
part, forced on him by ill health, bound him yet more devotedly to her.
As he grew older, he became a man of habit, and consequently averse to
travelling. It is impossible, however, not to believe, that if he had
varied his residence in Germany by occasional visits to his native
country, the disease under which he laboured, which embittered though it
did not shorten existence, would have been dissipated and cured.

Metastasio's life, we are told, is only to be found in his letters, yet
these detail no event; one of them contains, indeed, an offer of
marriage to a lady, whose name is omitted: it is well written, and with
considerable delicacy of sentiment; but, as he had no acquaintance with
the object, and aspired to her alliance on account of her character, and
his friendship for her father, his feelings could not be very deeply
interested. Many of his letters are addressed to his brother, and they
display a warm interest for his family. After the death of Marianna, the
management of his affairs in Italy devolved on his relatives, and many
are taken up with directions and advice. Leopold, and the rest of
Metastasio's family, fell into the common error of supposing, that since
he was in favour at court, the greatest prosperity would flow in upon
him. The poet endeavoured to undeceive him:--"Princes and their
satellites," he writes, "have neither the will nor power to confer
benefits correspondent to the notions people are pleased to form. I do
not know what definition merit bears among them; and I religiously
abstain from inquiring, placing it among those mysteries which are
beyond, though not contrary to, our understanding. Following these
principles, I do all that is enough to prevent my feeling remorse for
sins of omission; but I never allow hope to interfere in the guidance of
my cautious line of conduct. It is a long time since I have ceased to be
the dupe of hope, and it would be shameful to become such at our age.
Expect less, therefore, on my account, and you will find the scales more
even. This letter speaks more freely than any other, as I write only for
you, and among other earthly goods, I desire for you the most useful of
all,--a clear perception, if not of all, of the greater part of those
innumerable errors, contracted through our lamentable education, and our
intercourse with fools."

These sentiments did not float merely on the surface of Metastasio's
mind,--he made them the guides of his actions. As he says, gratitude and
duty regulated his conduct, but no servile hunting after greater
benefits mingled with the deference he manifested towards those in
power. He acted on the defensive in his intercourse with courts, with
such consistency of purpose, that he refused the honours chiefly valued
there, and declined the various orders, and the title of count, which
the emperor Charles VI. had offered to bestow on him.

It is from passages such as these, interspersed in his letters, that we
can collect the peculiar character of the man--his difference from
others--and the mechanism of being that rendered him the individual that
he was. Such, Dr. Johnson remarks, is the true end of biography, and he
recommends the bringing forward of minute, yet characteristic details,
as essential to this style of history; to follow which precept has been
the aim and desire of the writer of these pages.

In other letters Metastasio writes concerning his works, and explains
his views in the developement of his dramas; but he never makes himself
the subject-matter without an apology. "Never in my life," he writes on
one occasion, "did I before write so much concerning myself. I perceive
this at the end of my letter, and blush, not because I feel myself
guilty of too great self-love, but because I shall appear so to you.
Remember that few people distrust themselves to a fault, as I do; and in
communicating to you the perfection which I desire to attain, I do not
fancy that I am exempt from those defects, to which human nature and my
own weakness expose me."

All his letters to his brother express the most earnest and affectionate
interest. It is the more necessary to mention this, as one of the
calumnies propagated against him was, an aversion to render service to
his relatives. "You know," he writes to his brother, "that your honour
and welfare have always been the objects of my solicitude, and that I
never proposed to myself any reward, except the agreeable consciousness
that my endeavours to introduce you and sustain you in the career of
letters, have not failed of success; if you think that you owe me any
gratitude, pay it by increasing my self-satisfaction on this account.
You can never show yourself more generous to me than by meriting that
esteem which begins to be your due."

On the death of their father he writes with great feeling:--"The loss of
our poor father did not surprise, while it filled me with the liveliest
grief. I measure your sorrow by my own. I feel that it will require time
to render me reasonable. I thank you for your fraternal kindness in the
midst of your affliction. Dear brother, you now fill the place of a
father in his stead: do it worthily, and if there is any thing that I
can do to comfort you, demand it from me without reserve: your
consolation will produce mine. My poor sisters!--how lost they will feel
themselves! take care of them, dear Leopold: reflect how much fewer
supports they have than we against the assaults of passion, especially
of that feeling which is derived from the most sacred of nature's laws.
Adieu. If I have always loved you, consider how this affection is
augmented by the loss of him who possessed before so large a proportion
of it. Let yours increase also."

His brother distinguished himself afterwards by some writings in favour
of religion; and it appears that he even had the design of writing the
poet's Life. Metastasio, while he praised Leopold for occupying himself
in a praiseworthy manner, advised him against publishing controversial
arguments, which would occasion him to be attacked by the cleverest men
of Europe; and which, doubtless, were not stamped with that talent which
could insure success. Metastasio, while deprecating the spread of
unbelief occasioned by the French philosophers of those days, yet joined
with the throng in fearing their attacks, and in flattering
Voltaire,--showing in how great awe he stood of the enmity and sarcasm
of that wonderful man. It is supposed that Leopold died in 1770, after
which date no more letters appear addressed to him.

One of the principal correspondents of Metastasio, and to whom his most
agreeable letters are addressed, is Farinelli. The poet and the singer
were nearly of the same age; both began their career at Naples at the
same time; which causes Metastasio to give his friend the affectionate
appellation of his twin. Both met with immediate and complete success;
and they formed a friendship, which the letters of the poet prove to
have been maintained on his side with sentiments of the warmest
affection, and the most active wish to render service. After having met
with the greatest applause in the various theatres of Europe, Farinelli
was invited to Spain, in 1737; where his voice had the peculiar effect
of calming and solacing the accesses of malady to which the king, Philip
V., was subject. On this account he was retained at the Spanish court, a
large income was settled on him, and he never sang again on the public
stage, being, to please the Spanish notions of etiquette, made cavalier
of the orders of St. Jago and Calatrava, that he might be considered of
rank sufficient to attend the private hours of the monarch. Philip V.
died in 1746, but Farinelli continued in equal favour with his
successor. His prosperity continued till the accession of Charles III.,
in 1763, when he was ordered to quit Spain, and, with singular cruelty,
not permitted to make choice of an abode. At last, Bologna was
prescribed to him as the place that would best please the Spanish
monarch,--we are not told for what reason, except that Farinelli was as
a foreigner in that city, and cut off from all personal intercourse with
his friends.

An interesting volume might be formed out of Metastasio's letters to the
singer. They are full of enthusiastic friendship; now dwelling on
alterations made to operas for the peculiar benefit of Farinelli,--now
on more personal topics. Metastasio's days were clouded by ill health,
and his genius impaired through the same cause; but it did not check the
overflow of his kind heart, nor injure the happy influence of his
contented disposition. It is difficult, however, to select passages,
since the interest consists in the openness, friendship, and warmth of
the whole, and mere isolated extracts would be devoid of attraction. The
whole correspondence is replete with frank exhibitions of the writer's
mind, and the style is remarkable for its vivacity as well as elegance.

With the exception of his physical sufferings, which were rather
annoying than painful, and that sensibility of character which could not
fail to chequer his life with a thousand various emotions, Metastasio's
latter years was singularly prosperous, and perfectly monotonous. A few
weeks spent each autumn in Moravia was his only change. The empress
kindly excused him from forcing his powers to compose new dramas, and
his occupation principally consisted in the easy task of instructing the
archduchesses in Italian. When the empress Maria Theresa died, the
emperor Joseph II. continued to him his protection; and the esteem and
even affection in which he was held at the imperial court prevented the
death of his benefactress from injuring his fortunes, or disturbing his
repose.

He filled, however, a place in the public eye which exposed him to a
good deal of trouble. As the first Italian poet of the day, each minor
aspirant to the laurel sent their verses for his criticism, or rather
approval. He has been accused of lavishing praise without moderation or
judgment. It is difficult for one author not to flatter other authors,
since severity of criticism will be attributed to envy or ill-humour;
and, besides, the Italian genius is singularly inclined to superlative
panegyric. But it may be remarked that, though Metastasio gilds the
pill, he never fails, particularly to his friends, to point out the weak
points of their works, and to bestow sagacious and valuable
observations.

When Dr. Burney visited Vienna in 1772, Metastasio was an old man; and
his life, uninterrupted by any events, flowed on in one unbroken and
quiet stream. "He lives," writes the doctor, "with the most mechanical
regularity, which he suffers none to disturb. He has not dined from home
these thirty years. He studies from eight o'clock in the morning till
noon. Then he is visited by his acquaintance. He dines at two; and at
five receives his most intimate friends. At nine, in summer, he goes out
in his carriage, pays visits, and sometimes plays at ombre. He returns
at ten o'clock, sups, and goes to bed before eleven. In conversation he
is constantly cheerful; fanciful, playful, and sometimes poetical; never
sarcastic or disputatious; totally devoid of curiosity concerning the
public news or private scandal in circulation; the morality of his
sentiments resembles that of his life. In confidence with few, but
polite to all, his affection to his countrymen is great, and extends to
ecclesiastics, painters, musicians, poets, and ministers from the
Italian states, who are all sure of his kindness and good offices. I was
no less astonished than delighted to find him look so well; he does not
seem more than fifty years of age. There is painted on his countenance
the genius, goodness, propriety, and benevolence, which characterise his
writings. I could not keep my eyes off his face,--it was so pleasing and
worthy of contemplation."

He thus spent in ease and peace the last years of his life. It has been
said that, like Dr. Johnson, he had a great aversion to any allusion
being made to death in conversation, and carefully avoided all
lugubrious subjects. He continued to live with his friend Martinetz,
whose daughter, Marianne, being educated by Gluck, became a celebrated
musician; and in this family he met with that respect, attachment, and
attention that rendered old age easy.

His last letter was written to Farinelli. He complains of the "dreadful
season," and says, that he "cannot find a friend or acquaintance who
does not complain of ill health."--"We are all equally obliged," he
writes, "to have recourse to resignation. My neighbour prays for me, and
I pray for my neighbour; and we all are wishing better health to our
afflicted friends. My complaints obstinately defend their posts, and I
my patience."

This letter is dated in March, 1782, and was written but a short time
before he died. Though advanced to the age of eighty-four, his death was
unexpected, as the vigour of his constitution, and his vivacity and
unbroken powers, promised several years more of life; nor did his
nervous indispositions threaten dissolution, for they neither interfered
with his sleep nor appetite, nor the enjoyment he both conferred and
received in his domestic circle. A fever, attended with weakness and
loss of speech, and lethargy, carried him off after an illness of only
twelve days. He died tranquilly, and without pain, on the 12th of April,
1782. He left the family of Martinetz his heirs to considerable wealth;
his property consisting of about 130,000 florins, in addition to many
valuables presented to him by sovereign princes. He was sincerely
regretted at Vienna; and Martinetz struck a medal in his honour. Nor was
he forgotten in his native country; and the various literary academies
of Italy vied with each other in offering poetic testimonials of
veneration to his worth and genius.


[Footnote 47: "Ah, tu non sai
Qual guerra di pensieri
Agita l'alma mia.
*     *     *     *
Trovo per tutto
Qualche scoglio a temer. Scelgo, mi pento;
Poi d' essermi pentito
Mi ritorno a pentir. Mi stanco intanto
Nel lungo dubitar, tal che dal male
Il ben non distinguo: alfin mi veggio
Stetto dal tempo, e mi risolvo al peggio."

"Ah, thou knowest not the war of struggling thoughts
That agitates my soul. I find in all
Some peril still to dread. I choose; and then,
My choice repent--and then again regret
Having repented; while protracted doubt
Wearies my mind, so that the ill from good
No longer I distinguish; till at length
The flight of time impels me to the worst."]

[Footnote 48: We have made no remark on the nature of this kind-hearted
and generous woman's attachment. In Italy it is customary to look on
such as formed by friendship only, and to consider that they are
rendered respectable by constancy. The Italians lavish the greatest
praise on Marianna Bulgarelli for her perception of the poet's merits,
her zeal in persuading him to, and assisting him in, his arduous career;
and the disinterested affection which caused her at once to make a
sacrifice of her own feelings, and to advise his journey to Vienna. Her
errors are those of her country. Any one who has visited Italy must at
once censure, and deeply deplore, the social system there carried on--a
system which blights the affections, degrades the moral feeling, and
causes almost universal unhappiness. But it is unjust to heap the
censure of a system belonging to a whole country, and carried on for
centuries, on the head of an individual, whose virtues, we may presume
to say, redeemed an error, the very existence of which is, after all,
uncertain.]

[Footnote 49: Baretti.]

[Footnote 50: There is a curious instance in Metastasio of a poet using
the same image adopted by a preceding writer, which yet, it is probable,
that the later one had not read. The explanation may be, that both drew
it from an ancient writer; but we have been unable to find it. The
passages are subjoined as, if both are unborrowed, it forms a curious
though natural coincidence of thought.

And as goodly cedars,
Rent from Oeta by a sweeping tempest,
Jointed again, and made tall masts, defy
Those angry winds that split 'em, so will I
New pieced again,
And made more perfect far,
Stand and defy bad fortunes.

FLETCHER, _Tragedy of "Valentinian._"

Spezza il furor del vento
Robusta quercia, avezza
Di cento verni, e cento
L' ingurie a tollerar.

E se pur cade al suolo
Spiega per l' onde il volo,
E con quel vento istesso
Va contrastando il mar

_Adriano._]




GOLDONI

1707-1792.


The life of Goldoni, written by himself, is, as well as his comedies, a
school, not of crabbed philosophy, but of Italian manners, in their
gayest, lightest guise. At a time when it is hoped that a change is
taking place in the system of society in that country, resulting in a
great degree from the concourse of English, it is interesting to observe
what they were anterior to the French revolution, and to remark the
state of the Italians before they awoke to the sense of their
oppression, or, rather, while oppression was in exercise only of the
first of its effects--the demoralisation of its victim, before the
second stage of its influence, that of producing a noble and impatient
disdain of servitude.

Carlo Goldoni was born at Venice, in the year 1707, in a large and good
house, situated between the bridge of Nomboli and that of Donna Onesta.
The Venetians, who, when on land, spend their lives in running up and
down the bridges that cross the canals, make them the chief land-marks
of their directions. The family of Goldoni came originally from Modena.
His grandfather, while studying at Parma, formed an intimacy with two
Venetian nobles, who persuaded him to accompany them to Venice; and the
death of his father rendering him soon after independent, he established
himself in the native city of his friends. He had an employment under
government, and was sufficiently rich, but not at all economical. He
loved the drama; comedies were played in his own house; the most
celebrated actors and singers were at his orders; and he was for ever
surrounded by a concourse of theatrical people. His son had married a
lady of the Salvioni family, and resided with his father. Carlo was
born in the midst of all the bustle and hilarity attendant on a
predilection for actors and acting: his first pleasures were derived
from plays; his first recollections were of histrionic gaiety; and his
future life retained the colouring imparted by the amusements of his
early years.

He was the delight of the family. His mother devoted herself to his
education, and his father to his amusement. He made a puppet theatre for
him, and, with two or three friends, drew the cords and acted plays to
the boy's infinite delight. But a change soon came over this holiday
life. His grandfather died, in 1712, from the effects of a cold, caught
at an assembly. His extravagance had dissipated his fortune; and, from
abundance and luxury, the family fell into the narrowest circumstances.
The prospects of the father of Goldoni were dark. He had no employment
and no profession, and his inherited property was all sold or mortgaged.
In the midst of this distress, his wife gave birth to a son: this added
to the solicitude of the father; but, unwilling to be the prey of
useless gnawing cares, he set out on a visit to Rome, for the sake of
diverting his thoughts. His wife remained at home with her sister, and
two sons. The second, never a favourite, was put out to nurse; and she
devoted herself to Carlo. He was gentle, obedient, and quiet. At the age
of four he could read and write and say his catechism; on which they
gave him a tutor. He grew to love books, and made progress in grammar,
geography, and arithmetic; but the old instinct survived, and plays were
his favourite reading. There were a good many in his father's library:
he pored over them at his leisure hours, copied the passages that
pleased him most; and, incited by a noble hardihood, at the age of
eight, wrote a comedy. Some laughed at it; his mother scolded and kissed
him at the same time; while others insisted that it was too clever to
have been written by a child of his age, and that his tutor must have
helped him.

Meanwhile his father, instead of returning after a short visit, remained
four years at Rome. He had a rich friend there, who received him
cordially, lodged him in his own house, and introduced him to Lancisi,
physician and private attendant to Clement XI. He attached himself
warmly to Goldoni, who was clever and agreeable, and sought to advance
himself. Lancisi advised him to study medicine. The advice was taken.
After attending lectures and hospitals for four years at Rome, he took
his doctor's degree; and his patron sent him to Perugia to exercise his
profession. He became in vogue in this town: if he were not the best
physician in the world, he was an agreeable man, and quickly gained the
esteem and friendship of the first families. Thus fortunately situated,
he resolved to have his son with him. He does not appear to have thought
of inviting his wife also; and the mother and child were separated, to
the deep grief of the former. Carlo quitted Venice for the first time,
in a felucca. He disembarked at the mouth of the Marecchia, and it was
proposed that he should continue his journey on horseback. Carlo had
never seen a horse except at a distance: he was frightened when placed
on the saddle, confused when told to hold reins and whip; but, as the
novelty wore off, he made acquaintance with this new and strange animal,
and fed him with his own hands.

On arriving at Perugia he was placed at school. His first trial by the
masters, for the purpose of judging what progress he had made in Latin,
was infelicitous; he became the ridicule of his companions; his masters
conceived a slight opinion of his abilities; his father was in despair,
and Carlo fell ill from mortification. The holidays drew near, when it
was usual for the scholars to present a Latin composition, as a specimen
of their powers, on which their advancement to a higher class was
determined upon. Carlo had no hope of any such promotion. The day came:
the master gave out the theme; the pupils wrote. The boy summoned all
his powers; he thought of his honour, his father, his mother; he saw his
companions look at him and laugh; rage and shame animated him to
redoubled exertions; he felt his memory clear--his thoughts free: he
finished, sealed, and delivered his paper before any of his comrades.
Eight days after, the school was assembled--the decision announced:
Goldoni had the first place--his translation was without a fault. He now
received compliments on all sides, and his father was desirous of
rewarding him. He was aware of his love for theatricals, and shared it.
He assembled a company of young actors in his own house, and erected a
theatre. A play was got up, in which Goldoni took the part of prima
donna, and was much applauded; but his father told him that, though not
devoid of talent, he would never make a good actor, and after experience
proved the justice of his decision.

The signora Goldoni bore her husband's absence very philosophically; but
she could not consent to continue separated from her son: she entreated
her husband to return; and, on his refusal, removed herself to Perugia.
But, accustomed to the soft air of Venice, the climate of that city,
placed on the summit of a hill, and surrounded by mountains, disagreed
with her: other circumstances tended to disgust her husband with
Perugia; and, as soon as Carlo had finished his course of education at
the school, they resolved to return to Venice. Passing through Rimini in
their way, they were received kindly by a friend, who persuaded them to
leave Carlo for the sake of his pursuing his studies under a celebrated
professor. His parents embarked for Chiozza. Chiozza is a town
twenty-five miles from Venice, built, like that city, upon piles in the
midst of the sea; it contains 40,000 inhabitants; the population were
divided between rich and poor; the rich wore a wig and a cloak; the
poor, a cap and a capote. These last, who were fishermen and sailors,
while their wives fabricated lace, had often more money than many
individuals of the class named rich. The signora Goldoni took a liking
to this place; and her husband was averse to return to Venice till his
circumstances should have become more easy. To further this end, he was
obliged to make a journey to Modena: he proposed to his wife to
establish herself at Chiozza till his return; and she consented.

Carlo, meanwhile, remained at Rimini. He did not like his master, who,
bigotted to rules and systems, wearied him to death: he escaped from
him, to read Plautus, Terence, Aristophanes, and the fragments of
Menander; and soon the incarnate spirit of drama arriving at Rimini, he
was wholly turned from his abstruser studies. A company of actors made
their appearance, and Goldoni became familiar with them: he went behind
the scenes; joined in their parties of pleasure; and they, being all
Venetians, were happy to find a countryman. One Friday it was announced
that they were leaving Rimini, and that a boat was engaged to carry them
to Chiozza. "To Chiozza!" said Carlo, "My mother is at Chiozza!"--"Come
with us, then," cried the director. "Yes, come with us," cried the whole
company, "come in our boat; you will have a pleasant passage; it will
cost you nothing: we shall laugh, dance, and sing, and be as happy as
the day is long." A boy of fourteen could scarcely resist so strong a
temptation. His master refused leave, and the friends of his family
interfered with objections. There was but one resource: Carlo put two
shirts in his pocket, and hurried to hide himself in the boat. It made
sail, and he was on his way to Chiozza. The light-hearted rambling life
of strolling comedians was alluring beyond measure to a mirthful lad,
who loved plays better than any thing in the world. The company
consisted of twelve, besides scene-shifters, mechanists, and prompters;
there were eight men servants, and four women, two nurses, a quantity of
children, dogs, cats, apes, parrots, birds, pigeons, and a lamb. The
prima donna was ugly, clever, and cross; the suicidical drowning of her
cat diversified the time; and, after a prosperous and merry voyage, the
whole cargo, with the exception of poor puss, arrived safe at Chiozza.

The signora Goldoni received her son with a mixture of gladness and
scolding, which evinced no violent disapprobation of his truant
disposition; but he himself began to regret it, and to reflect seriously
on the consequences, when he read a letter just received from his
father. Business had taken Goldoni from Modena to Pavia. The governor of
Pavia was named the marchese di Goldoni-Vidoni. On hearing of the
arrival of a namesake in his town, he sent for him, and invited him to
dinner. The governor belonged to one of the best families of Cremona;
but he considered that Cremona and Modena were not far distant from each
other, and he had the whim of finding out and assisting a poor relation:
he promised to get a presentation for Carlo to a college of the
university of Pavia, and the father gladly consented to accept it. He
set out to seek his son with this news, and found him sooner than he
expected, and was by no means pleased at a scrape which promised little
for his future steadiness; but Carlo was penitent, and Goldoni gloved
actors, and was acquainted with several of this very company in
question: so, good easy man! he forgave the runaway, and accompanied him
to thank the companions of his voyage.

Goldoni's fame as a physician had spread to Chiozza, and he found it
worth his while to establish himself, and to enter upon practice there:
while waiting for the presentation for the university of Pavia, he
resolved to initiate his son in the rudiments of a profession which he
intended him hereafter to pursue. He did not put him to the more
difficult part of the medical science; but made him accompany him in his
visits to his patients, as the easiest mode of giving him a superficial
knowledge. Carlo did not like this plan, though he was forced to submit.
But passive obedience of will does not conquer the mind: with all his
gaiety, the youth was subject to fits of hypochondria and low spirits,
and under the paternal discipline he lost his appetite, and grew thin
and serious. His mother easily extracted from him the cause of his
dejection, and sought to bring a remedy. She represented to her husband,
that the patronage of the marchese Goldoni could be of no possible
service to their son in a medical career; while, on the contrary, if
they brought him up to the bar, a senator of Milan could without
difficulty open to him the road of fortune. She advised his going to
study under an uncle at Venice, proposing to accompany him herself, and
to stay with him till his removal to Pavia. Goldoni resisted for a long
time, but at last he became aware that her representations were
reasonable: poor Carlo listened to the discussion with tearful eyes and
a beating heart; and his indisposition vanished as soon as his father's
consent was given. Four days after, he and his mother set out for
Venice. They were kindly received by signor Paolo Indric, who had
married his father's sister; and Carlo found his home with him perfectly
delightful. The study of law was infinitely to be preferred to his
father's medical initiation at Chiozza; he fulfilled his duties with
exactitude, and his uncle was satisfied with him.

Meanwhile he enjoyed his residence at Venice. "Oh! la triste ville que
Vénice!" Madame de Genlis exclaimed, on entering the sea-paved city.
Scarcely any but a French person would echo her exclamation; and _we_,
who people the palaces and bridges with the shades of Othello,
Desdemona, Pierre, and Belvidera, find a peculiar charm in its strange
and beautiful appearance. There is something charming to the imagination
in the wide-spread lagunes, in the palaces rising from the waves, the
sea that flows through the streets, and the sombre-looking but luxurious
gondolas: no picture, no description, can convey an idea of Venice, that
is, of the impression made by its singular aspect, and the modes and
machinery of daily life--dissimilar to those of every other city in the
world. The young Goldoni, as a native, yet returning to it after so long
an absence, was enchanted by the novelty of all he saw. His stay,
however, was short; the presentation to a College at Pavia arrived: he
was forced to quit Venice; and, after a harried visit to Chiozza to join
his father, they set out together.

[Sidenote: 1723.
Ætat.
16.]

On arriving at Milan, several obstacles presented themselves to impede
his entrance into the university, which, being under clerical
jurisdiction, required a number of attestations and documents, with
which the travellers were wholly unprovided, and which could only be
obtained at Venice. Signora Goldoni hastened thither to get them, while
the father and son enjoyed themselves at Milan, hospitably entertained
by their kind and noble soi-disant relation; till, the necessary papers
having arrived, they pursued their way to Pavia, and Goldoni left his
son at his college.

The university of Pavia was on a more expensive and luxurious footing
than is usual in Italy, and dissipation and liberty were the order of
the day. The students were regarded in the town like officers in
garrison: the men hated, and the women welcomed them; while the studies
principally followed up were dancing, fencing, music, and games of
hazard: the latter were prohibited, and, therefore, the more sought
after. Carlo's youth, gaiety, and Venetian dialect pleased generally;
and he easily suffered himself to be seduced from study to pleasure.

His success caused him to make many enemies among his fellow-students,
augmented by the distinction derived from the kindness of the marchese
Goldoni; still he passed two years happily enough, returning to Chiozza
during the vacations, and spending his time between unforced studies and
pleasant society. But misfortune was at hand to blight his happiness.
The time approached when he was to take his degree; and this very moment
was seized upon by his college enemies to ensure his disgrace. He had
been admitted into the university at sixteen: the legal age was
eighteen. He was a boy among men, and an easy prey. A serious quarrel
arose between the inhabitants of Pavia and the students: four among the
latter, who had conspired to ruin poor Carlo, persuaded him to revenge
himself and his comrades by a satire. The verses of which he was the
author attacked and insulted many families: his four false friends
dispersed them and betrayed him: the outcry was prodigious; and, despite
every exertion made by his protectors, Goldoni was expelled. The youth
repented very bitterly at once his imprudence and the easiness of his
disposition. Shame and regret overwhelmed him, and the idea of his
parents' reproaches filled him with terror. To escape these he meditated
plans of flight, resolving to seek his fortunes at Rome. It appeared of
slight import to him that he should go on foot without money or
resources, so that he could fly from those who were justly offended.
This idea was frustrated by the vigilance of those about him: he was
sent back to his family under the especial care of the master of the
boat, who never lost sight of him; and a good monk, who was a passenger
with him, comforted him by his pious but kind admonitions. His mother's
affection and his father's easiness of nature led them to pardon his
fault, from which he had suffered severely enough. A few days after he
accompanied his father to Friuli. Goldoni exercised his profession as
physician at Udine, and Carlo studied the law under an eminent advocate;
after a short time, the former proceeded to Gorizia, to the house of
count Landieri, lieutenant-general of the army of the emperor Charles
VI. The count was ill, and having heard of the skill of Goldoni, sent
for him. Carlo, left behind at Udine, got into several youthful scrapes,
very little to his credit: he found himself deceived and betrayed; and,
fearing a dangerous termination, he hurried away, and found his father
at Vispack, where count Landieri had a mansion. They remained there for
some months, till the count was convalescent, hospitably entertained,
and very happy. A dramatic puppet-show was got up, which exercised the
theatrical talents of Carlo; and afterwards he made a tour to Laubeck,
Gratz, and Trieste, with the count's secretary. On his return to
Vispack, he and his father set off on their journey home, the latter
having happily effected the cure of his patient, who rewarded him
handsomely for his trouble. "We arrived at Chiozza," said Goldoni, "and
were received as a fond mother receives a son, and a wife a beloved
husband, after a long absence. I was delighted to see again a virtuous
mother who was tenderly attached to me. After having been deceived and
betrayed, I needed the consolation of being loved. This, indeed, was
another species of attachment, but, until I felt a virtuous and
engrossing passion, my mother's love formed my greatest happiness." Soon
after his arrival at Chiozza, his father received a letter from a cousin
at Modena, to inform him that the duke of that state had revived an
ancient decree, which forbade the possessor of any landed property
within it, to absent himself without an express permission from the
sovereign, which it was very expensive to obtain. This relation added,
that his best course would be to send his son to Modena, which would
satisfy the law, and he might there pursue his legal studies. The advice
was followed, and the youth sent to Modena.

He went by water; and the master of the boat was a very religious man:
each evening he invited the passengers to join him in prayers. When
Goldoni arrived at Modena, this man, whose name was Bastia, asked him
where he meant to lodge, and, learning that he had his lodgings to seek,
asked him to select his house as his place of abode; and, with the
assent of his cousin, who had been the cause of his journey, Goldoni
agreed to the proposal. He found that the family of Bastia was equally
devout with himself; father, sons, and daughters, all were given up to
pious exercises. No great amusement could be derived from their society;
but, as they were respectable people, and lived in concord, Goldoni was
satisfied and happy under their roof. He grew as religiously inclined as
themselves, while, as is often the case in youth, this sentiment was
accompanied by feelings of despondency and even terror. One day he
happened to pass through the public square while an unfortunate
churchman was doing public penance for his conduct towards a female
penitent. The sight struck him in the most painful manner: he brought it
home to his own heart; he thought of his past life, his expulsion from
college, his adventures in Friuli: the world seemed beset with
multiplied dangers, and there was no refuge from them, except in total
retirement. He wrote to his parents to express a part of these feelings,
and to declare his resolve of entering the order of Capuchin monks. His
parents acted on this occasion with prudence: they were both, especially
his mother, pious, but without bigotry. They wrote in answer, that he
should do exactly as he pleased, but in the mean time entreated him to
return to them without delay. He immediately obeyed: he was received
with caresses, and no opposition was made to his project. His father
proposed to take him to Venice, and he refused with that boldness which
the fancy of acting in immediate obedience to God, alone inspires; but,
on being told that he was to be introduced to the guardian of the
Capuchins, he consented. They went to Venice, visited their relations
and friends, dining with one and supping with another: he was even
tricked into going to the theatre. His low spirits and ascetic vocation
vanished insensibly, and he returned to Chiozza cured of every wish to
shut himself up in a cloister.

It became matter of anxiety to know what to do with him. His brother, an
adventurous, gallant youth, had entered the army, and was in garrison.
But Carlo was nothing; the plaything of fortune, all the expense gone to
on his account had been of no avail; the only resource seemed to be to
obtain an employment under government; and, at the moment when it
appeared impossible to succeed in so doing, one presented itself to
them. The republic of Venice governed the towns under their dominion
through an officer called a podestà, who had under him a chancellor, or
criminal judge, who was assisted in his duties by a vice-chancellor, or,
as he was called, a coadjutor; and where there was much to do, this
officer also had an assistant. These places were more or less lucrative,
but were always desirable, since they included the privilege of dining
at the governor's table, and making one of his society. The father of
Goldoni was intimately acquainted with the governor of Chiozza, and with
the judge, and through their means Carlo was employed to assist the
coadjutor.

Goldoni was not of a noble and enterprising disposition, but he
possessed great integrity, and that habit of scrupulously examining his
own motives, and those of others, which makes a part of the nature of
one whose bent it was to enter into and describe character. On this
occasion he was earnest to do his duty, and interested to observe the
variety of human action and motive, which presented themselves to his
enquiry in the exercise of his office as assistant to the criminal
judge. He acquitted himself to the satisfaction of his superiors; and,
when the governor of Chiozza was changed, and the chancellor was
appointed to go to Feltri, the latter offered Goldoni the place of
coadjutor, which was eagerly accepted.

Feltri is at a distance of 180 miles from Venice, high up among the
mountains, whose snows besiege it during the winter, and block up the
streets and houses. Goldoni found plenty of amusement here, for there
was a company of comedians; and he also fell in love. He assures us that
this was his first passion, and a sincere one; but the future writer of
comedies had not that tenderness and passion of soul which creates a
profound and engrossing attachment. He made parties of pleasure for the
lovely girl, who returned his affection, and got up a tragedy for her
amusement, which did not amuse her at all; for, too bashful to act
herself, with all the delicacy of love, she was pained at witnessing her
lover's familiar conduct with other women. "Poor girl!" exclaims
Goldoni, with naïveté; "she loved me tenderly and sincerely, and I
loved her with all my heart; and I may say that she was the first person
for whom I felt a sincere attachment. She was desirous of marrying me;
and would have become my wife, but for some considerations which
prevented my proposing for her." These considerations were a notion he
formed that her beauty was of a delicate, evanescent species, and that
she would soon fade and become old, while he remained in the pride of
youth. Such was the force of his first passion, that it was at once
overcome by selfish foresight, and the habit, innate in him, of
dissecting the materials of life, despoiling them of their sunny gloss,
and handling the most frail, yet precious, among them with a roughness
that iron and rock could not have resisted. This dry, analytical spirit
is very apparent in his comedies: he dignifies it with the name of
morality and honour; but its root is often in coldness and tameness of
feeling and fancy.

On his return from Feltri his father had accepted a medical situation at
Bagnacavallo, a town of Romagna, near Ravenna. Carlo joined him; but,
after a short time, the elder Goldoni fell ill of a malignant fever, and
died in the month of March, 1731, when his son was four and twenty years
of age. He was sincerely lamented by his wife and son, who wept together
over their loss. As soon as the funeral was over, Goldoni accompanied
the widow to Venice, and established her with her sister at the house of
a relation. She was most anxious to have her son resident with her, and
her persuasions, and those of other friends, induced him to yield, and
to enter on the profession of barrister at Venice. The profession of
advocate at Venice was exceedingly honourable; the first men of the city
practised it: but there were 240 registered barristers, and few among
them rose to eminence; the rest spent their time in running after
briefs. Goldoni, however, was of a sanguine disposition, and did not
doubt that he should rank among the most celebrated pleaders at the bar.
He calculated how much could be gained, and found that a barrister might
make an income of 2000_l_. a year,--a large fortune at Venice, which at
that time, before it fell under the Austrians, whose aim is to ruin it
by the imposition of a vexatious taxation, was one of the cheapest
places in the world. It is true that the beginning of a forensic career
is in all countries trying to the patience; and, while Goldoni indulged
in castles in the air with regard to future eminence, he spent his time
attending the courts without a brief, or in waiting for clients, who did
not appear: still he might hope for better success than the major part
of his brethren of the robe, since, during the first six months of his
being at the bar, he carried on and won a cause; but his destiny
concurred with the genius still unformed and dormant within him to draw
him another way.

At the very moment of triumph on gaining his suit, and when he might
fairly hope for an influx of clients, an incident occurred to destroy
his prospects, causing him to form the resolution to quit Venice.

He had fallen in love with a lady at Venice, who, though forty years of
age, was as fair and beautiful as a girl. She was rich and unmarried:
the affection was mutual, and he already looked forward to their union,
when the attentions of a noble awakening the ambition of the lady, she
jilted him for his patrician rival. This lady had a married sister with
two daughters, one deformed and the other ugly, but not without
attraction; she had beautiful eyes, a laughing countenance, and
graceful, fascinating manners. She had often deprived her beautiful aunt
of lovers, and inspired her with jealousy. She tried to win Goldoni from
her; and, on her tergiversation, vengeance induced him to make the niece
an offer. Her mother entered into her plans, and the contract of
marriage was drawn up and signed; but when the moment came to fulfil it,
a variety of doubts presented themselves to Goldoni's mind. He was
himself in debt, and several years must pass before he could hope to
make an income at the bar. The mother of his promised bride was wholly
unable to fulfil the conditions of the marriage contract, and he found
that he should be burdened with the expense of his wife's family. He
consulted his mother, and his own sense of prudence: he had become very
much in love but, in his light heart, every motive and impulsa was
stronger than the strongest affection: frightened at the prospect before
him, he made a sudden determination; paid his debts, threw up his
profession, and quitted Venice; leaving a letter for the unfortunate
girl's mother, attributing to her his sudden departure, and promising to
return if she would fulfil the conditions of the contract. He received
no answer.

Again he was thrown on the world, and all his prospects of future
subsistence were centred in a tragedy, called "Amalassunta," which he
had written in his leisure hours. It has been mentioned how, born amidst
theatricals, his early pleasures had all been derived from plays. When
he first went to Pavia, he had studied the ancient drama; and, finding
that Italy had no theatre, he had already conceived the idea of
bestowing one on her, on a more enlarged plan, more intricate as to
plot, and more diversified as to character, than those of Plautus and
Terence. In the course of his youth, to get up a play was his chief
pleasure; and now, with "Amalassunta" in his pocket, he felt sure that
his fortune would be made at Milan, at the theatre of which city he
intended to offer it; and, with this expectation, his happy disposition
caused him easily to forget prospects, friends, love, and
disappointments,--all but his mother; while the pleasure of freedom
easily consoled him for the loss of his bride.

Poor and almost friendless, the first piece of good fortune that
happened to him was finding at Bergamo the noble who had been governor
at Chiozza when he was vice-chancellor. He presented himself at his
palace, and was kindly received. The governor perceiving that he was
depressed in spirits, enquired the cause: and Goldoni confessed that he
was penniless: his kind protector offered him his purse and a home at
his house. Goldoni contented himself with borrowing ten sequins, and, in
lieu of the latter offer, asked for letters of introduction at Milan,
which were instantly given him. These served him in good stead in that
capital. The Venetian resident received him kindly, asked the object of
his journey, and, when Goldoni had recounted his adventure, offered to
lend him money, which was declined.

"Amalassunta" was the anchor of his hope, and he lost no time in seeking
the actors and directors of the theatre. He paid a visit to the first
ballerina, whom he had formerly known, and offered to read his opera to
her circle of actors, and musicians, and theatrical patrons. His offer
was accepted: he took the manuscript from his pocket, and
commenced--"Amalassunta!" The chief actor, Caffariello, began to object,
in the first place, to so long and ridiculous a name. Every one joined
in the laugh thus raised, except the poor author, who went on to read
the list of dramatis personæ. New censure followed the too great number
of persons introduced; and, when it was found that the opera commenced
by a scene between the two principal actors, he was told that would
never do: the chief singers would never consent to begin during all the
bustle of the first entrance of the audience. The criticisms multiplied
as he went on, till a kind amateur, count Prata, took him by the hand,
and, leading him into another room, asked him to read the opera to him
alone. Poor Goldoni consented, and the whole piece was gone through.
When finished, the count pointed out its defects, not with regard to
plot and situation, but to operatic rules; how he had given airs of
passion and interest to secondary personages, and curtailed the first of
what they considered their just proportion. The count would have gone on
to find more fault, but Goldoni begged him to take no more trouble, and
took his leave. He returned, mortified and miserable, to his inn. His
first impulse was to burn his unlucky opera. The waiter asked him if he
would sup. "No," he replied, "no supper, only a good fire." While this
was making, he looked over his poor "Amalassunta:" it appeared to him
very beautiful, and worthy of a better fate: the actors were in fault,
not it. Yet; after all his pains, his hopes were fallen; and, in a fit
of desperation, he cast it on the flaming brands, glad to see it burn,
and busy in collecting all the fragments, that none might escape
destruction. While thus employed, he began to recollect that no disaster
which had yet happened to him, had ever caused him to go to bed
supperless. He recalled the waiter, ordered his repast, ate it with a
good appetite, and went to bed to sleep till morning. It is no wonder
that love could exercise so little power over so well-regulated an
appetite!

The next morning he was obliged to reflect seriously on his desperate
situation, and he paid Signor Bartolini, the Venetian resident, a visit,
that he might consult with him. He asked for a private interview, and it
was granted; and then he related the occurrences of the previous
evening, the impertinent criticisms of the actors, and the decisive
judgment passed by count Prata, and ended by declaring that he was
totally at a loss what to do. Bartolini laughed at his recital, and
asked to see the opera. "The opera?" cried Goldoni, "I have not got
it!"--"Where is it, then?"--"I burnt it; and with it my hopes, my
possessions, and my whole fortune." The minister laughed still more at
this _dénouement_, and ended by offering him the situation of gentleman
in his palace, with a good suite of rooms. Goldoni now found that he had
gained by his loss: without doubt, as he declares himself, he was a
lucky man, and it was his own fault whenever he fell into misfortune.
Yet he did this so frequently, that the best part of his luck was that
cheerful buoyant disposition which never allowed him to be overwhelmed
by adversity, and an integrity that always kept him from any
dishonourable scrape.

"Amalassunta" was burnt, but Goldoni's predilection for theatricals
continued as strong as ever. There arrived at Milan a singular man,
named Buonafede Vitali, who had talents and knowledge enough to practise
as a regular physician, but who preferred strolling as a mountebank,
under the name of the Anonymous. As a part of the paraphernalia of his
trade, he had with him a company of comedians. Goldoni sought out this
man, who availed himself of his protection, to obtain leave for his
company to act on the Milanese theatre. There were several good actors
among them, but their representations were made on the old Italian plan.
Goldoni was particularly scandalised by a travestie of the story of
"Belisarius," given out as a tragedy; and, to prevent the future
degradation of historical names and sentiments, he promised to write a
tragedy on the subject, but was interrupted by events of greater moment.

The king of Sardinia allying himself with France against the Austrians,
in the war of 1733, he sent an army of 15,000 men, to which was added
some French troops, to occupy Milan. That city being too wide in circuit
for defence, it was forced to receive the soldiers; who immediately
entered on the siege of the citadel. On this event, the Venetian
resident was ordered by his government to quit Milan, and to take up his
abode at Crema: he had before quarrelled with his secretary, and he took
this opportunity to dismiss him, and to install Goldoni in his place. He
was now fully employed, and his situation was at once honourable and
lucrative; but soon after he lost the good graces of the minister,
though not from any fault of his own. His brother had quitted the
Venetian service, and, seeking employment, visited him at Crema. He
introduced him to the governor, who gave him the situation of gentleman
of his chamber, formerly occupied by Goldoni; but both were violent and
irritable, and they did not agree. The resident dismissed his gentleman,
and no longer regarded Goldoni with the same favour as heretofore. They
had a quarrel; Goldoni asked for his dismission, and set out for Modena,
where his mother was residing.

The country through which he passed on his way was the seat of war;
robbers took occasion of the unsettled state of the country, and the
roads were unsafe: Goldoni was the sufferer; the little carriage in
which he travelled was attacked by five men, who robbed him of his
money, watch, and effects, while he escaped across the country, glad to
preserve the clothes he had on. After running a long way, he came to an
avenue of trees, by which flowed a rivulet. He drank of its waters in
the hollow of his hand, and then, fatigued in body, but more composed in
mind, he proceeded quietly along the avenue, till he encountered some
peasants, to whom he related his misfortune, and who in return told him
that there were a set of outlaws who took advantage of the war to attack
not only travellers, but gentlemen's seats and cottages; while a number
of men of some wealth near, who had formed themselves into a company to
purchase the spoils of war, became their accomplices by becoming the
purchasers of the stolen goods. "Such," exclaims Goldoni, "are the
miseries of war, which fall alike upon friends and enemies, and ruin the
innocent!" The sun was now declining, and the peasants offered Goldoni a
part of their supper, of which, notwithstanding his disaster, he partook
with appetite. They then guided him to a village, and recommended him to
the care of the curate, who received him hospitably. To him he related
his adventures, making his manuscript tragedy of "Belisarius," then in
his pocket, the principal hero of the tale. He was invited to read it.
The curate, two abbés, and the servants of the house, were his
audience; and they all applauded it with enthusiasm. The offers and
kindness of these good simple-hearted people filled Goldoni with
gratitude. Unwilling, however, to burden them with his maintenance, he
hastened to take leave; the curate lent him his horse, and sent his
servant with him to defray the expenses of the day's journey to Brescia.

From Brescia, Goldoni proceeded to Verona. He was in a deplorable
situation; he only possessed a few sequins, lent him by an adventurer
whom he met by accident at Brescia; but with "Belisarius" in his pocket,
he did not fear the enmity of fortune, and "Belisarius" did not prove so
false a friend as "Amalassunta." When at Verona, he went to the
celebrated amphitheatre, a portion of which was arranged as a theatre,
and here a drama was about to be performed. To his infinite joy, he
discovered in the principal actor a man who had formed one in the
companions of the mountebank at Milan, and for whom he had promised to
write "Belisarius." He instantly went behind the scenes, and was
welcomed with joy. He was on the moment installed poet to the company.
"Belisarius" was read, approved, and the parts distributed. In the month
of September they proceeded to Venice. Goldoni was presented to the
proprietor of the theatre, who received him with kindness. On the 24th
of November, 1734, he being then twenty-seven years of age, "Belisarius"
was acted, and met with the most complete success. All actors in Italy
are strollers, and looked upon with a good deal of contempt. Goldoni
might have been expected to regret the exchange he had made from the
honourable profession of an advocate, for that of poet to a theatre; but
his light heart and easy temper were not to be afflicted by trifles of
this nature, and the talent that perpetually impelled him to take
interest in theatricals, prevented him from feeling degraded by his
association with the professors of the art: and their existence and all
its vicissitudes bear another aspect under a sunny sky, and amidst a
laughter-loving people, unspoilt by pride. Goldoni had much of the
spirit of Gil Blas in his disposition, and possessed in his own person
all the talent which belongs, not to the hero of that book, but its
author. Several pieces, operas, and interludes of his were brought out;
and in the spring he accompanied the actors to Padua and to Friuli,
where, leaving them, he returned to Venice to see his mother, who had
arrived there from Modena. His success as an author, and the talent he
displayed, raised him in the estimation of his fellow-citizens. His
relations crowded around him; and he repaid their kindness by relating
his adventures to his old uncles and aunts, making those laugh, who had
never laughed before. In September the actors returned to Venice, and he
recommenced his labours, which were not all literary, but interspersed
by those occasioned by the jealousy of the actors, or rather of the
actresses. After the winter season had passed, he consented to accompany
the manager to Genoa and Florence, and was glad, without expense, to
visit two of the most celebrated cities of Italy.

He was delighted with the aspect of Genoa; and the first good fortune
that happened to him, was to gain 200 crowns in the lottery; the second,
to marry a girl, "who," he tells us, "was beautiful, virtuous, and
prudent, and who, after all he had suffered from the treachery of women,
reconciled him to the sex."

His acquaintance began in the true Italian style: he saw her at an
opposite window, and, pleased with her appearance, saluted her. She
curtsied, and hastily withdrew, nor again presenting herself at the
window. His curiosity was thus excited; he made enquiries, and learnt
that her father's name was Corrio; that he was a notary, with a large
family and small fortune. He contrived to make acquaintance, and within
a month asked permission to marry his daughter. The affair was soon
concluded: he was married in July; and, omitting the promised visit to
Florence, returned to Venice at the beginning of September.

Hitherto Goldoni's pieces had been rifaccimenti of old dramas.
"Griselda," "Don Giovanni," and "Rinaldo di Mont' Albano," were
melodramas or tragedies, written in the old style. But at this time,
finding that the company of actors at Venice, through various changes,
had become one of great excellence, he began to think the time arrived
when he might enter on the reform of the Italian theatre, which he had
long meditated: he commenced writing comedies of character, which are
the genuine source of the dramatic merit, following the example of
Molière, who had surpassed all ancient models, and even now stands
alone, as the first comic writer in the world. "Was I wrong," he asks,
"in presuming to enter upon such an undertaking? for my natural bent
leading me to write comedies, excellence in the art was the proper aim
of my endeavours."

The old comedy in Italy was on a singular system: there were four masks
on which all the farcical incidents turned. Pantaloon, a Venetian
merchant, who was the father of the heroine; a garrulous, kind-hearted
old gentleman. The doctor, a Bolognese, also an old man, whose learning
was opposed to Pantaloon's simplicity: and two Bergamese servants.
Brighella and Harlequin. Brighella, a clever rogue; Harlequin, a greedy
simpleton; his many-coloured clothes symbolising the poverty that forced
a patched garment. The actors who filled these respective parts seldom
played any others. It required ready wit and cleverness; for the plot
only being sketched, and the scenes indicated, the dialogue was left to
their own invention. Of course, no great refinement could be expected:
practical tricks and broad jokes were sure to command the laughter and
applause of the audience; while, there being in the Italian character
something peculiarly adapted to extempore exercises of the intellect,
and a vivacity that renders them good actors, many people regarded this
rude but amusing effort at drama, as something at once so national and
so genuine, as rendered it preferable to the studied productions of the
closet. Goldoni, on the contrary, saw farce take place of comedy, and
the whole action and conduct of the piece often sacrificed to the
petulance of a favourite mask; while no real sentimental interest, nor
any comic incident out of the common routine, could be introduced. He
proceeded, however, slowly in the reform he meditated. At first writing
only the more serious portions of his plays; then the parts of the masks
themselves, and only after some time, and at intervals, dispensing with
them altogether. Nor, at the time of which we are writing, did he bring
out any of his best dramas; though those which he did produce were
eminently successful.

To add to the respectability, and, as he hoped, to the emoluments of his
situation, the relations of his wife obtained for him the Genoese
consulship at Venice. This office, however, turned out more honourable
than lucrative: no salary attended it, and the fees did not amount to
more than 100 crowns a year. To do the republic he served honour, he had
taken a better house and increased his number of servants, and found
himself considerably embarrassed. To add to these annoyances, his income
from Modena failed him; and he came to a resolution to make a journey,
with the triple object of bringing out a comedy with a part for a
favourite actress at Bologna, to solicit a salary at Genoa, and to look
after his possessions at Modena: the first object failed before he set
out, through the sudden death of the actress, while an unexpected
disaster rendered the two latter even more imperative than before. His
brother, who was out of employ, introduced to him a Ragusan of agreeable
and gentlemanly manners. He asserted that he was sent on the secret
service of raising a regiment of 2000 men for his state. He showed his
commission as colonel, offered a company to Goldoni's brother, and the
office of auditor, or judge, to the author. Goldoni, always
easy-tempered and credulous, though a little frightened by the danger
incurred if the Venetian state should come to suspect these proceedings,
was soon talked over, and, on an alleged emergency, lent the man a large
sum of money. The fellow was an adventurer: he ran off with the money,
and left Goldoni so disagreeably implicated by his tricks, that he
judged that his only resource was to quit Venice on the instant. The
Ragusan had disappeared on the 15th of September, and on the 18th of the
same month Goldoni and his wife embarked for Bologna.

[Sidenote: 1741.
Ætat.
34.]

Their journey was full of "many accidents of flood and field." The
melancholy and thoughtfulness occasioned by his disaster vanished under
the influence of his happy temperament; and his wife was even better
skilled than he in that best philosophy which makes light of worldly
misfortunes. On their arrival at Bologna, he was surrounded by the
directors of theatres, who asked for comedies. He gave them three, and
wrote another on the subject of the Ragusan swindler, in which he
comforted himself, and dissipated the rest of his regrets, by
representing to the life all the actors in that too real drama. This
task concluded, he was about to proceed to Modena, when he heard that
the duke was absent at the Spanish camp at Rimini, and that his best
chance of pursuing his claims was to accompany Ferramonti, a celebrated
pantaloon, to the latter town; where, in default of justice being done
him by his sovereign, he might have a further resource in the company of
actors to which this comedian belonged. This latter staff turned out the
stoutest of the two: the duke changed the conversation when Goldoni
mentioned his claims on the ducal bank; but as long as the carnival
lasted, he supplied the actors with dramas, and lived a comfortable life
at Rimini. At length it became necessary to depart for Genoa. The armies
which then occupied the country rendered it impossible to get horses;
and he and some other travellers agreed to embark for Pesaro. The sea
was high, the passengers suffered: weary of their sea voyage, they
disembarked half way, at Cattolica, and, leaving their effects to the
care of servants, proceeded in a cart to Pesaro.

A new misfortune here awaited him. The Spanish army had changed
quarters, and were replaced by their enemies, the Austrians. The
soldiers entered Cattolica, and seized on the boat, the servants, and
the effects of the unlucky passengers. All was lost: trunks and
band-boxes, dresses and jewels, were the spoil of the ravagers: even the
signora Goldoni was moved by so overwhelming a calamity: but some remedy
was to be found. Goldoni resolved to apply in person to the Austrian
officers for the restitution of his property; and his wife, with great
cheerfulness, prepared to accompany him. Pesaro is ten miles distant
from Cattolica: with great difficulty they hired a carriage to take
them. The vetturino was very averse to the job, but showed no signs of
discontent. When three miles from Pesaro, the pair alighted to walk a
short distance; and the cunning fellow, seizing the opportunity, turned
his horses' heads, and gallopped back to Pesaro, leaving them in the
middle of the road. No house, no living being was to be seen; the
inhabitants had fled on the arrival of the armies. Signora Goldoni began
to cry. "Courage!" said the husband; "it is but six miles to Cattolica:
we are young and strong; it will not do to turn back; let us walk on."
The journey was not, however, an easy one; the road was crossed by
several torrents, and the bridges were broken. Goldoni carried his wife
over the swollen streams; but they had been obliged to make a circuit in
search of a ford, and found themselves fatigued beyond measure. At
length they arrived at the first advanced post of the Austrians. Goldoni
presented the passport with which he came provided, and they were
conducted to the commanding officer. The colonel at first took them for
two wandering pedestrians; but, reading the passport, he made them sit
down, and, looking kindly on them, said: "What, are you signor
Goldoni?"--"Alas! Yes," replied the other. "Author of 'Belisarius?'"--"I
am indeed."--"And this lady is the signora Goldoni?"--"She is the last
good I possess in the world."--"I hear you came on foot."--"Alas! sir,
you heard the truth." Goldoni now explained the nature of his
expedition, and the officer reassured him: he restored his luggage, and
liberated his servant, and, happy in the recovery of their property,
Goldoni and his wife returned to Rimini.

After spending some weeks happily in this town, he set out on a tour
through Tuscany, meaning to proceed afterwards to Genoa. He visited
Florence, Siena, Volterra, and then arrived at Pisa. While walking
about to see the "liens" of this town, he passed by a palace, and,
perceiving that a great concourse of people were entering its gates, he
looked through, and saw a large court, and the company all seated in a
circle round. He asked a servant in livery, who waited, what the
occasion was of so large an assembly. "That assembly," replied the man,
"is a colony of the Arcadians of Rome, called the Alphean colony; that
is, the colony of Alpheus, a celebrated river of Greece, which flows
near the ancient Pisa of Aulis." Goldoni asked if he might make one of
the audience, and the servant ushered him to a seat. After a variety of
pieces of poetry had been read, he sent the servant round to ask if a
stranger might be permitted to recite; and, on being answered in the
affirmative, he repeated an old sonnet of his, which, with a little
alteration, seemed extemporised à propos for the occasion. The Pisans,
charmed at once by the compliment and the talent of the stranger,
crowded round him. He made many acquaintances, was invited to their
houses, and their cordial kindness seemed at one time to change the
whole tenour of his life for ever. For, invited and pressed by them, and
promised protection and patronage, he became a pleader once again, and
for three years practised at the Pisan bar. Briefs flowed in, clients
were numerous, all were satisfied, and Goldoni, content with his lot,
abjured the theatre. He was too well known to be without temptations to
break his resolution: actors wrote to him for plays, and he tried to
refuse, and then, yielding to the desire, he wrote pieces for them in
hours borrowed from sleep, and gave his days entire to his profession.
Still law and the drama contended for him, and his heart was with the
latter, though he tried to turn his back on her, and to devote himself
to her rival. But he lost the game. A manager, named Mendebac, arrived
at Pisa with a company. Goldoni went to see the representations. They
acted his comedy of "La Donna di Garbo," which he considered his best
piece: he had written it for a favourite actress; but she died, and he
had never seen it acted. The wife of the manager was young, beautiful,
and a good performer, and she took the part of the Donna di Garbo. It is
difficult exactly to translate, in one word, this expression: as used by
the Tuscans it means, the worthy woman--the woman whose conduct is
upright and estimable. The heroine of the piece, however, deserves more
the name of the cunning than the worthy; and her chief merit consists in
her success. Rosaura is the daughter of a lace-maker of Pavia; and her
mother's house being frequented by many of the students and professors
of the university, she acquires a good deal of the scholastic pedantry
of the schools. She is seduced by a student, who deserts her; on which,
for the sake of revenge, she gets, herself introduced as a servant into
the house of his father, where, by pleasing every body, and adapting
herself to their humours, and by great display of learning, she hopes to
force her lover into a marriage, and succeeds. This is by no means one
of the best of Goldoni's comedies, but it pleased on the stage; and on
this occasion the principal part being filled up by the wife of the
manager, who was a clever actress, it met with the greatest approbation.
Goldoni, warmed by success, enticed by the offers of the manager, and
drawn on by the instinctive bent of his disposition, suddenly resolved
to leave Pisa and the profession which he was pursuing with so much
advantage, and returning to Venice, to enter again on the task of
writing comedies for its theatre. Such a determination was sufficiently
strange and imprudent; but Goldoni's love for his art was such, that he
never regretted the sacrifice he made; on the contrary, being now wholly
devoted to the drama, his enthusiasm rose, and, filled with projects for
its reform, he worked with an ardour, which was rewarded by success, and
which inspired his best pieces.

It is, perhaps, difficult for a person who has never visited Italy to
enter with zest into all the merits of Goldoni. His perfect fidelity to
nature, the ease of his dialogue, and the dramatic effect of his pieces,
can only be entirely appreciated in the representation. The best of them
have often a slight plot, but the interest is kept alive by the variety
of the dialogue. It was only slowly, however, that he proceeded to the
reform of the Italian comedy; the substitution of natural incident for
violent and forced situations, and the higher properties of comedy for
the mere burlesque of farce. Obliged to bring out his plays in quick
succession, they are, of course, unequal, and did not meet always with
the same approbation. Unfortunately, his first season ended with a piece
which had no success. The company for which he wrote, had to contend
with others, longer established in the city; and; at the end of the
carnival; these circumstances combined to afford a dreary prospect for
the following year. At this moment Goldoni stepped forward in the most
singular manner; to the assistance of the manager. He publicly promised
sixteen new comedies for the next season; and the audience, wondering
and anxious, instantly engaged all the boxes. His enemies ridiculed, his
friends trembled for him; but he felt secure that he could fulfil his
engagement, although at the moment he had not conceived the plot or plan
of one of the promised sixteen.

This certainly was a great stretch of invention and mental labour. Out
of the sixteen, for he completed the whole number, there were not more
than three or four mediocre ones, and some were among his best. The
"Donne Puntigliose," or Punctilious Ladies, is exceedingly amusing. A
Sicilian trader's wife from the country, desires to be received among
the noble ladies of Palermo: she contrives to get herself invited to
small parties, where there are many men, and no lady except the mistress
of the house; but finds it impossible to get admitted to their
ceremonious assemblies. At last, an old countess, high-born, but poor,
promises to give a ball, to which she shall be invited, on certain
conditions, to which the low-born lady readily consents, though they
draw rather largely on her purse. But to her consternation, as soon as
she enters the ball-room, every woman flies as if she brought infection
with her, and leaves her alone with her hostess. The punctilious
scruples of those who try to make use of her without derogating from
their own dignity, and who are ever ready to receive, but never to
confer favours, form a very amusing picture of manners. "Pamela" was
among the most successful of these pieces. Richardson's novel of
"Pamela" is a great favourite with the Italians; and Goldoni was often
asked to write a drama on the subject. As the Venetian laws are severe
against the children of a _mésalliance_, he considers the catastrophe
of the novel as not inculcating a recommendable line of conduct. He,
therefore, transformed Gaffer Andrews into a Scottish lord of the
rebellion of '45, and gave Pamela good blood to render her marriage with
her lover a commendable act on his part. This comedy had the greatest
success. "The Donna Prudente" was equally a favourite. The story is
founded on a jealous husband, afraid of ridicule, who is tortured by the
attentions of the cavaliere servente of his wife, yet who dares not
encounter the laughter that would ensue if he forbade the service. The
prudent lady exerts herself with success to get rid of her cavaliere
without its being supposed that her conduct arises from her husband's
jealousy. The last of his sixteen was a purely Venetian subject, written
almost entirely in the Venetian dialect: it is called "I Pettegollezzi,"
or The Gossipings, and turns on the misfortunes brought on the heroine
through the gossip of her female acquaintances. It was brought on the
last day of carnival. "The concourse," Goldoni writes, "was so immense,
that the price of the boxes was tripled and quadrupled; and the applause
was so tumultuous, that those who passed near the theatre were uncertain
whether the sound was that of mere plaudits, or of a general revolt. I
remained tranquil in my box, surrounded by my friends, who cried for
joy. When all was over, a crowd of people came for me, forced me to
accompany them, and carried, or rather dragged, me to the Ridotto, and
overwhelmed me with compliments, from which I would fain have escaped. I
was too tired to support all this ceremony; and, besides, not knowing
whence all this enthusiasm sprang, I was angry that the piece just
represented should be more extolled than many others which were of
greater merit. By degrees I discovered the true motive of the general
acclamation: it celebrated the triumph of my fulfilled engagement."

Goldoni was now forty-three years of age. His invention had not yet
fallen off, but he tried his strength too much. An illness was the
consequence of this extraordinary exertion, and he felt the effects of
it all his life after; yet during the ensuing season he brought out
scarcely a smaller number, and, as he proceeded, attained a yet purer
style of comedy; and he became the censor of the manners, and satirist
of the follies, of his country. The peculiar system of what is called
service, paid by gentlemen to the ladies of their choice, all over
Italy, would have presented an ample field both for ridicule and
reprehension, could he have ventured on it openly; but he was obliged to
treat it with the same reserve, when bringing it on the stage, as is
used when it is spoken of in society; and he could attack only the
ridicule, not the real evils of the system. This comedy, called the
"Villeggiatura," which turns on this subject, is particularly amusing;
but it can scarcely be called an attack upon it. An Italian gentleman,
returned lately from Paris, offers to serve a lady in the French manner:
he is not to perform those thousand services required of the cavaliere
servente, nor to attend on her, nor to be of any use or amusement to
her: they are to be friends secretly; and, to preserve their friendship
more sacredly, they must abstain from nearly all intercourse with each
other. The lady, accustomed to be constantly waited upon, and to find in
her cavaliere a resource against the ennui of solitude, is at a loss to
understand the good that is to result from a negative of all the
ordinary uses of friendship. The "Smanie della Villeggiatura" attacks
another of the foibles of the Venetians. It is their custom, each
autumn, to spend several weeks at their country seats; but, instead of
this being a period of economy and retirement, it was the fashion to
invite their friends, and to transport with them the dissipation of the
city. Besides this, it being necessary, as a mark of fashion, to retire
to a villa, those who were poor, and did not possess one, fancied
themselves obliged to hire a house, and to go beyond their wealthier
neighbours in the number of their guests and the splendour of their
entertainments: nor can any idea be formed out of the country of the
sort of fanaticism with which this custom was pursued; even to the
bringing ruin on those who imagined themselves forced to so unnecessary
an expense. Goldoni wrote three comedies on this subject: the first
consisted in describing the preparations for the villeggiatura, or visit
to the country. It has for its subject the difficulties of a a poor
proud family, who were bent on following the general example; the
thousand obstacles that rendered it almost impracticable; and the envy
with which they view and vie with the preparations of their wealthier
acquaintance. At length they depart triumphant, resolving to forget
their debts and difficulties until their return. The second comedy
consists of the adventures in the country; where, in the midst of
gambling, pleasure, and apparent enjoyment, a thousand annoyances
distract, and jealousy and envy prevent, all real happiness. The third
comedy, of the return from the country, shows the unfortunate lovers of
rural pleasures overwhelmed by debt; surrounded by a thousand
difficulties, sprung up while there; and saved only, when on the verge
of ruin, by a kind and prudent friend who assists them, on their promise
never to undertake a villeggiatura again. These plays are without the
masks, and give a perfect representation of Italian conversation and
manners. As he wished to criticise the Venetians, he did not venture to
place the scene at Venice; but the audience easily brought home to
themselves the faults and follies of the Tuscans or Neapolitans. In thus
making a detail of some of the best of his plays, it is impossible to do
more than to indicate those which appear the best worth reading. The
"Vedova Scaltra," or The Gay Widow, was a great favourite in Italy. A
rich widow, with four lovers from four different nations, seeks from
each a proof of love, and gives her hand to the Italian, who, by his
jealousy, evinces, she imagines, the sincerest testimony of the tender
passion. The "Feudatario" has in it more of farce than he usually
admits, and is peculiarly amusing; as well as the "Donna del Maneggio,"
or Managing Lady, whose avaricious husband, after incurring a thousand
ridiculous disasters, ends by placing the disposal of his property in
his wife's hands. It would be too long and uninteresting to enter on
even this brief notice of more; but we may mention the titles of some of
his best, to guide any one who wishes to read only a portion of the vast
quantity he wrote: among these may be named "Il Cavaliere e la Dama,"
"Il vero Amico," "La Moglie Saggia," "L'Avanturiere Onorato," "Molière
e Terenzio," which he names himself as the favourite offspring of his
pen.

He spent many years thus respectably and happily. He loved his wife and
his domestic circle. The applause of a theatre perpetually ringing in
his ears, he was gratified by the consciousness that he was reforming
the national taste. Sometimes he was attacked for what he considered the
chief merit of his dramas. The advocates of the old comedy condemned his
new style as puerile and tame. He defended himself, and was satisfied
that he obtained the victory. During the summer, when the theatres at
Venice were closed, he visited the various cities of Italy; and his life
was diversified, and his invention refreshed, by these occasional tours.
He had reason to be dissatisfied with the manager, Mendebac, who had
allured him from Pisa, as he not only was illiberal enough not to add to
his salary on these extraordinary efforts, but appropriated the profits
arising from the publication of his works. Goldoni was unwilling to
enter into a lawsuit with him; he contented himself, therefore, by
bringing out an edition of his play at Florence; and as soon as his five
years' engagement with Mendebac was over, he transferred himself to the
theatre of San Luca, on terms at once more advantageous and honourable.

With some few reverses, attendant on an entire change of actors, and his
ignorance of the peculiar abilities of the company, to which he was not
accustomed, his career on this new stage was equally successful. He
wrote several comedies in verse, which became peculiar favourites. This
success was the occasion of his being invited to Rome during the
carnival: but his dramas did not succeed so well there. The actors,
unaccustomed to his style, were unable to give them with any effect, and
the Roman audience called out for Puncinello.

In 1750, he received an offer from the French court of an engagement for
two years, on very advantageous terms. Goldoni hesitated a little about
accepting it. A few years before, his brother had returned to Venice, a
widower, with two children. Goldoni gave up to him all his property in
Modena, and adopted the children, having none of his own. He made a good
income in Italy; but he had no provision for old age: still he was
unwilling to leave his native country--whose climate and people were
dear to him--where he was honoured, loved, and applauded. He made some
enquiries with regard to the possibility of getting a pension from the
Venetian government; but this appearing a vain hope, he considered it
right to close with the offer of the king of France. He hesitated the
more before taking this step, as, although the engagement in question
was but for two years, he felt that, once in Paris, and acquiring an
honourable maintenance, it was probable that he should never see Italy
again.

During the carnival of 1761, the last pieces he wrote for the Venetian
theatre were represented: one, the last acted, was a sort of allegorical
leave-taking, which was so understood by the audience; and the
acclamations and adieus of the public moved him to tears. He left Venice
in April 1761, accompanied by his wife. His mother was dead; his niece
he placed in a convent, under the superintendence of a respectable
family at Venice; his nephew was soon to follow him. As he passed
through Italy, on his way to France, he was received at the various
towns with distinction and kindness. He spent some little time at Genoa,
with his wife's relations, and then they proceeded by slow stages to
Paris.

Goldoni's _débût_ as an author in the French capital was not a happy
one. The Italian comedians there were not accustomed to regular
comedies, which they were to learn by heart, but to the old style of
their native farce, where the plot and arrangement of the scenes were
all that was written, and they filled up the dialogue themselves.
Goldoni wrote two or three pieces for them on this plan without success.
His stay in Paris was, however, decided by the post of Italian master to
the daughters of Louis XV. being bestowed on him. He knew so little of
French, that he gained as much knowledge from the princesses as he
imparted to them. His salary was very slender, but it was increased in
the sequel; and his nephew also was provided for by the post of Italian
teacher in the military school.

Goldoni was charmed by the French actors; and his ambition was excited
to write a comedy to be represented by the excellent comedians who then
flourished. His desire was fulfilled to the utmost. He brought out "Le
Bourru Bienfaisant," into which he endeavoured to instil the spirit of
French dialogue and plot with great success; so that Voltaire praises it
as the best French comedy written since Molière. He wrote another on
the same plan; but it fell to the ground, and he at last desisted from
adding to the immense number of pieces of which he is the author.

He lived tranquilly and content with his moderate means. His niece was
married at Venice; his nephew settled happily at Paris. The revolution
did not, fortunately, disturb the repose of his last years. The National
Convention confirmed his pension to him, and continued it to his widow
after his death. Goldoni died in the year 1792, at the age of
eighty-five. No man was ever more born for the career which he pursued.
His heart was excellent, and his disposition gay. He never allowed
himself to be cast down by adversity, and met the attacks of his enemies
with good humour, or such replies as caused the laugh to be on his side.
He is numbered by his countrymen as among the best of their authors,--an
opinion confirmed by all those sufficiently cognisant with the Italian
language and manners to enter into the spirit of his compositions.




ALFIERI

1749-1803.


The Italian poets of the early ages were eminently distinguished for
their patriotism. The haughty spirit of Dante burst forth into indignant
denunciations against the oppressors of his country; the gentler, but
not less fervent, Petrarch was never weary of adjuring its rulers to
bestow upon it the blessings of justice and peace; and the latter years
of Boccaccio's life were ennobled by his public services, and his
earnest endeavours to implant a love and reverence for literature in the
minds of his countrymen. The pages of Roman history and the writings of
Roman poets made them proud of the country which had given them birth,
and which added to its moral grandeur, of having been once the sovereign
and civiliser of the world,--the natural affection inspired by its
being, from its fertility, the diversity of its woods, lakes, and
mountains, and surrounding sea, the most beautiful country upon earth.

The national spirit died away in after times. The devastating wars
carried on in the Peninsula by France and the emperor, the rise of minor
principalities, and the struggles of rival states, so excited the
passions and absorbed the interests of the Italians, that they became
incapable of enlarged views for the good of their country. The
depressing influence of courtly servitude checked the free spirit of the
writers; Ariosto and Tasso were both conspicuous for personal
independence of character; but they did not extend their love of liberty
to any exertions for the redemption of Italy. A darker day was at hand.
The Peninsula, divided and weakened, became a mere province. A Spanish
viceroy reigned over Naples, and the northern portion was controlled by
France and Austria. The Italians were taught to take pride in the
virtues of slaves; in submission, patience, and repose. The prosperity
of the country was gone, its trade destroyed, its armies annihilated. No
scope was given to generous ambition; no career offered, by entering on
which a man might exercise the peculiar privilege of the free--that of
instructing their fellow countrymen: to be inoffensive to the ruling
powers was the aim of all. The love of money--not the love of gain, for
to gain was impossible, but mere parsimony, arising from the necessity
of regarding the domestic expenditure as the only business of
life--engrossed the fathers of families; the women were uneducated and
degraded, and though they preserved, as is often the case in a depraved
state of society, a nature more generous, artless, and kindly than the
other sex, yet these virtuous feelings found no scope for their
developement, except in the passion of love. While the law of
primogeniture interested not only the large class of younger sons, but
even the heads of families, who wished to prevent their children from
marrying, to establish a system of society, which, beginning by
subverting the best principles of morality, ended by destroying all
social happiness. While the higher orders were thus occupied by
money-saving and intrigue, the lower orders were tamed by hard labour,
and rendered submissive by the priests. The writers were the servants of
princes: they administered to the pleasures of their countrymen, without
uttering one word that could call them from their state of debasement,
or inspire a love of the active and disinterested virtues.

Full of talent as the Italians are, and formed by nature for the noblest
scenes of action, doubtless "many a village Hampden" was born and died
in obscurity and inaction; and yet this expression gives rise to a false
notion. The peasants of Italy have no education, and, although
infinitely superior in talent, perhaps, to any other peasantry in the
world, are incapable of that generalisation of ideas which produces
patriotism. But, among the better sort of gentry,--men of simple habits
and strong good sense, among the men of science and the professors at
the universities,--there were individuals who mourned over the ruin of
Italy. These men did not so much dwell on the ancient greatness of Rome,
as on the achievements of their countrymen during the middle ages.
Literature had been revived by them; the arts had flourished among them:
they were proud of the past, but they despaired of the present.

The voice of liberty was silent. The Italians hated and despised their
masters, but never dreamed of rebelling against them. Tuscany was
slothful under a mild sway, whose tyranny was never felt, except by the
few who believed that they were not merely _fruges consumere nati_, and
were bitten with a noble mania for benefiting their race. Piedmont was
ruled by a prince, who, by cultivating in his subjects, not a martial,
but a military spirit (a very different thing), gave his idle nobles
something to do. Lombardy was crushed by foreign bayonets. The voice of
liberty was silent, when the French revolution awoke the world, and the
hope of freedom spoke audibly in the hearts of all; and, afterwards,
when the victories of Napoleon crushed this hope, they could not impose
a silence for ever broken. Its language is now felt and understood from
one end of the country to the other, and the day must come when the
oppressors will be unable to oppose the veto of mere physical force to
the overpowering influence of moral courage.

It was while Italy yet reposed submissive and mute, that a poet was
born, who dedicated all the powers of his mind to the awakening his
countrymen from their lethargy--to strengthening their enervated minds,
and spreading such knowledge and such sentiments abroad among them, as
would at once reveal their degraded state, and give them energy to
aspire to a better.

Vittorio Alfieri was born at Asti, in Piedmont, on the 17th of January,
1749. His parents were noble, wealthy, and respected. To these three
circumstances Alfieri attributes many of the prosperous circumstances
that attended his literary career. "Since I was born noble," he says, "I
could attack the nobility without being accused of envy; since I was
rich, I was independent and incorruptible; and the respectability of my
parents prevented my ever being ashamed of my rank."

His father was named Antonio Alfieri, and his mother was Monica Maillard
de Tournon, whose family, originally from Savoy, had long been
established at Turin. His father was a man of blameless life: he had
never entered on any public office, and was without a spark of that
ambition which might have led him to seek distinction at court. He was
fifty, five when he married, and his wife, though very young, was
already a widow. Their eldest child was a daughter. Two years after, to
the infinite joy of his father, Vittorio was born. He was put out to
nurse, at a village called Rovigliasco, two miles from Asti; but such
was the tenderness of his father, that he went on foot each day to see
the child. This was a strong mark of affection, and testified also his
simple and unostentatious disposition: for the Italian nobility usually
love repose beyond all things, and their greatest pride is never to go
on foot. This solicitude unfortunately cost him his life: he caught cold
on occasion of one of his visits, and died after a few days' illness,
leaving his wife about to give birth to another son, who, however, died
in his infancy. She was an amiable and excellent woman, and still young
when her second husband died; so that she was induced to marry a third
time. Her husband was a cadet, of another branch of the Alfieri family;
but, by the death of his elder brother, he in process of time inherited
the wealth of his family, and became very rich. This marriage proved a
very fortunate one. The cavaliere Giacinto was handsome and amiable; the
couple grew old together in happiness; and the lady, as she advanced in
years, gained the love and respect of all by her piety and works of
charity and kindness.

On the marriage of his mother, Vittorio and his sister went to live in
their father-in-law's house, who proved himself a kind parent to the
orphans. Although his health was not robust, Alfieri's childhood was
little interrupted by sickness; and his first grief was experienced at
the age of seven, when his sister Julia was sent to a convent for her
education. Although he was, at first, permitted to see her every day,
yet he felt, on her removal from the parental roof, that violence of
emotion and boiling of the blood which was apt to seize on him, in after
life, when forced to separate from any one to whom he was warmly
attached. Thus his sensibility developed itself early; and sensibility
and pride, both exalted into passions rather than feelings, were always
the prominent traits of his disposition, and which at last, from the
excessive influence they exercised over him, generated that gloomy
melancholy to which he was a victim.

Alfieri remained at home, under the tutelage of a worthy priest, named
Don Ivaldi, with whose assistance he began to learn the rudiments of
Latin. His disposition was, for the most part, taciturn and placid: now
and then he became loquacious and gay in the extreme, and, at other
times, the melancholy already nascent in his heart, filled him with
strange and passionate thoughts. He was obstinate when treated unkindly,
but readily yielded to affection; and, above all, he was susceptible, to
a painful degree, of the sense of shame. When, as a punishment for
childish faults, any sort of public penance was imposed on him, he
endured such transports of agony as affected his health for weeks.

At the age of nine, his uncle, the cavaliere Pellegrino Alfieri, who was
his guardian, returned from a tour in France and England, and visited
Asti, on his way to Turin. He found his nephew happy under the domestic
roof, but learning little or nothing; accordingly, he thought this a
very bad state of things, and insisted that he should be placed at the
public school at Turin, where ignorance, rather than knowledge, was
taught, but where, as he would be neglected and enslaved, it was to be
supposed that his education would prosper better than under the
indulgent care of a fond mother. She was obliged to consent, and parted
from her son with reluctance and tears. The boy's grief at the moment of
separation was vehement; but it was quickly dissipated by the delight of
travelling post, and the pleasure he took in bribing the postilions to
go at their utmost speed. He was accompanied by a servant only; and,
while the old man slept, the little fellow sat proud and gay in the
carriage, as it whirled past village and town in quick succession. When
arrived at Turin, his uncle received him kindly. He was at first
depressed by the change of scene, and missed the caresses of his loving
mother; but soon he became so joyous, and even riotous, that the
cavaliere Pellegrino hastened to place him at the academy: and here he
was, at the age of nine, torn from the domestic circle to which he was
accustomed, at a distance from all his friends, isolated and abandoned.
The only species of education, such as it was, entered upon at the
academy, regarded their literary studies: the feelings were left to form
themselves; lessons of morality and the duties of life making no part of
the instruction afforded the pupils.

"The academy," Alfieri tells us, "was a large, handsome quadrangular
building, with a large court in the middle; two sides of the square were
occupied by the students, the other two by the king's theatre and royal
archives. The side occupied by us, who were called of the second and
third apartment, was opposite the latter; that occupied by the students
of the first apartment being opposite to the king's theatre. The upper
gallery on our side was called the third apartment, and was devoted to
the younger boys and lower schools. The gallery on the ground floor was
called the second, and occupied by the pupils rather more advanced in
age: a portion of these studied at the university, another edifice
adjoining to the academy; the rest received their education in the
military college. Every gallery contained at least four chambers, each
occupied by eleven youths, over which an assistant, or usher,
presided,--a poor fellow, whose only payment consisted in being boarded
and lodged free of expense, while he studied theology or law, at the
university; or, if he were not a poor student, he was an old and
ignorant priest. A third portion of the side destined to the first
apartment was occupied by the king's pages, to the number of twenty or
twenty-five, who were totally separated from us of the second, at the
opposite angle of the court, and close to the galleries of the archives.
We, the younger pupils, could not have been worse placed. On one side,
was a theatre which we were only permitted to visit about five or six
times during the carnival; on the other, the pages who attended on the
court, and who, continually hunting and riding, appeared to enjoy much
freer and happier lives than the poor imprisoned boys; besides these, we
overlooked the proceedings of the first class, which was composed almost
entirely of foreigners, Russian and German, with a large proportion of
English;--this class was restrained by no rule except that of being in
by midnight; and their apartment was a mere lodging house to them,
instead of being a place of education."

Alfieri was placed in the third apartment: he had the luxury of a
servant to attend on him; but the fellow, unchecked by superior
authority, became a sort of petty tyrant over his young master: in all
other respects, he was on an equality with the rest of his comrades.

The basis of the system of education consisted in strict imprisonment,
little sleep, and unwholesome food. To this was added a certain degree
of parrot knowledge of the Latin language: the boys were taught to
construe Cornelius Nepos; but so little pains were taken, or, rather, so
little power was there in their instructors to enlarge their stores of
real knowledge, that Alfieri tells us, that not one of them knew who the
men were whose lives they read; nor what the country, government, or
times were in which they lived, nor even what thing government was. The
boy made progress, however, in what he was taught: his emulation was
excited, and his memory was cultivated; but, on the other hand, he grew
sickly and stunted in growth, the effects of bad food and too little
sleep. He had only his drunken, his dissipated servant to attend on him
when he was ill; who often, on such occasions, left him half the day
alone, which increased the constitutional melancholy of his disposition.
His pleasures were few; and the want of all affectionate treatment
blighted his life. It seems strange to us that his mother did not visit
him, and that he never went home for a vacation: but such were the
customs of the country, and he was brought up in conformity with them.

The spirit of emulation, caused him, in some degree, to distinguish
himself, and he advanced to higher classes and attended lectures on
philosophy, humanity, and mathematics; but such was the style in which
they were taught, that, when he had gone through six books of Euclid, he
was unable to demonstrate the fourth proposition; and, though he studied
a whole year under the famous Beccaria, he did not comprehend a word of
what he was taught. This is the less extraordinary, since, speaking the
patois of Piedmont, Italian was as a foreign language; and, though he
contrived to obtain a copy of Ariosto, he was unable to understand a
word of it. His teachers were, for the most part, equally ignorant; so
that while his time was devoted to Latin, his native language was a
sealed book to him. He had a few relations at Turin, and when he became
really ill, they interfered that he should have more sleep and better
food; but he continued a puny and ailing boy.

Some few pleasures diversified his life. His uncle found that the
education of his sister Julia was entirely neglected at Asti, and she
was removed to a convent at Turin. She was fifteen--in love--and divided
from the object of her affections. Her brother became her confidant: he
visited her twice a week, and tried to inspire her with constancy and
resolution; but youthful spirits were of more avail than the lessons of
romance, and, in short time, she was consoled. Another pleasure he
enjoyed was, when a relation took him, on one occasion, to the opera
buffa, sung by the best comic singers of Italy. The opera was the
"Mercante di Malmantile." The spirit and vivacity of the music made a
profound impression on him, leaving, as it were, a trail of harmony in
his ears and heart, so that for many weeks after he remained immersed in
an excessive, but not painful, melancholy. During this time he abhorred
and nauseated his usual studies, while a world of fantastic images
crowded his mind; and had he known how, he would have composed verses,
and have expressed the most lively emotions, had not all language in
which to express them been denied to him, through the ignorance of his
teachers. This was the first time that music exercised so great an
influence over him, and it remained long impressed upon his memory. At
all times he was excessively susceptible to the impressions made by
harmony, and he found that vocal music, especially female voices,
possessed a peculiar power to disturb and agitate his mind. Nothing, he
tells us, awakened in him more violent or various emotions; and almost
all his tragedies were conceived while in the act of listening to music,
or a few hours after. One other pleasure that he enjoyed during this
period, was spending a fortnight with his uncle at Cuneo. This little
journey did his health good, and occasioned him infinite delight. It was
here that he wrote his first sonnet, addressed to a lady admired by his
uncle, and who pleased him. As he knew nothing of Italian, or, as it is
called, Tuscan, this sonnet must have been very bad. It pleased the
lady; but his uncle, who was a soldier, and of an austere disposition,
and who, though imbued with sufficient knowledge of history and
government, despised poetry, ridiculed the boyish effusion, and put all
thought of writing another out of his head.

At the age of fourteen, the circumstances of his life were considerably
altered. His guardian uncle died. By the Piedmontese laws, children of
fourteen are considered, to a certain degree, of age, and are allowed
the entire disposal of their incomes; while a trustee is appointed to
prevent their alienating any part of the principal or real property.
Alfieri was thus raised at once to independence; and, to add to his
comfort, his servant, who had tyrannised over him, and who, unwatched,
and unchecked, had fallen into the worst vices, was dismissed. Alfieri
parted from him with regret, despite his ill-treatment, and showed the
kindliness of his heart by visiting him twice a week, and giving him
what money he could spare. He tells us that he can ill account for his
attachment to one who had shown so little kindness to him: he could not
attribute it to generosity on his part; but partly to habit, and partly
to the talents of the man, who, besides being singularly sagacious, was
accustomed to tell him long adventures and tales full of imagination and
interest.

The first fruit he reaped from the death of his uncle was being
permitted to attend the riding school, which had been before denied. He
was then of diminutive stature and weak of frame, and little able to
control his horse; but perseverance, and a great desire of success,
supplied every other defect. To this noble exercise he owed the good
health, robustness, and increase of stature, that he soon acquired. The
next great event that followed was, his being removed from the second to
the first apartment of his college. In the second, the students were
mere boys, and they were kept in strict discipline; in the first, entire
freedom and idleness was the order of the day. He made his entrance on
the 8th of May, 1763. His comrades were almost all foreigners, many were
French, a still greater number were English. An excellent table was
served in the best style, and all breathed luxury, comfort, and freedom.
Much amusement, a great deal of sleep and of riding, gave Alfieri
renewed health and spirits. He spent his money on horses or dress. His
trustee quarrelled with him for his extravagance, but that did not alter
the state of things. With liberty and money he acquired friends and
companions in every amusement and enterprise. "Yet," he says, "in the
midst of this busy vortex, being little more than fourteen, I was not
nearly so unreasonable as I might have been. From time to time, I felt a
silent impulse within me to apply to study, and a good deal of shame for
my ignorance, concerning the extent of which I never deceived myself,
nor others. But, grounded in no one study, undirected by any, not really
acquainted with a single language, I knew not how nor to what to apply
myself. I read French romances, and conversed with foreigners, and
forgot the little Italian I had before contrived to pick up from my
Ariosto. At one time I took it into my head to immerse myself in the
thirty-six volumes of Fleury's Ecclesiastical History, making extracts
in French; but soon I threw it aside, and took to romances and the
'Arabian Nights.'"

Riding, and horses, and fine clothes were his passions. He and his
friends went out in troops, leaping over every obstacle, fording rivers,
and breaking down the unfortunate animals they rode, till at last no one
would let them any. But these active exercises invigorated Alfieri's
health, strengthened his frame, and filled him with spirit and
resolution; preparing his mind to support, and even to make good use of,
the physical and moral liberty he afterwards acquired.

The youth of the first apartment were perfectly free, but they were all
young men: Alfieri was as a boy among them, being only fifteen; and it
was considered right that his servant should attend him constantly, and
act as a check upon him. The man who had replaced his former tyrant was
a foolish, good-humoured fellow, who easily yielded to bribery and
persuasion, and let his young master do as he pleased. But this did not
satisfy the youth's pride; he resolved to be on an equality with his
comrades, and, without saying a word to his valet, or to any one, went
out alone. He was reproved by the governor, but repeated his offence
immediately. On this he was put under arrest for a few days; but no
sooner was his prison door opened, than, in open defiance, he went out
again unaccompanied; and although, on the renewal of his offence, the
term of his imprisonment was prolonged, it was without avail. At length
he declared that his arrest must be perpetual, since as soon as he was
set at liberty he should exercise the same privilege, being resolved not
in any way to be on a different footing from his comrades; that the
governor might remove him from the first, and replace him in the second
apartment, but that he insisted upon being put in possession of all the
rights of his companions. On this he was kept confined for more than
three months; nor would he make any request to be liberated, but,
indignant and stubborn, had died rather than have yielded. "I slept
nearly all day," he tells us; "towards evening I got up from my bed,
and, having a mattrass placed near the fireplace, I stretched myself
upon it on the ground. Not choosing to receive the usual college dinner,
I caused food to be brought into my room, and cooked pollenta and
similar things at my fire. I never dressed myself, nor allowed my hair
to be touched, and became an absolute savage. Though I was not allowed
to quit my room, my friends were permitted to visit me; but I was sullen
and silent, and lay like a lifeless body, not replying to any thing that
was said; and thus I continued for hours, with my eyes fixed on the
ground, and full of tears, though I never suffered one to escape from
them."

This obstinacy must have annoyed his masters considerably, and they
were, no doubt, glad to make use of the first fair occasion for
restoring him to liberty. The marriage of his sister gave them a
pretext, of which they availed themselves. Julia married count Giacinto
di Cumiano on the 1st of May, 1764: the wedding took place at the
beautiful village of Cumiano, ten miles from Turin. Alfieri enjoyed the
spring season and his newly recovered liberty with intense delight, and,
on his return to college, was admitted to all the privileges of the
class of students to which he belonged. The control over his income
being now almost entirely in his own hands, he launched out into a
variety of expenses, the first of which was the purchase of a horse, a
fiery but delicate animal, which he loved so passionately, that he could
never after call him to mind without emotion: if it was ill, he could
neither eat nor sleep. The delicacy of this beloved horse was the
occasion of his buying another; and after that he bought carriage
horses, and cab and saddle horses, till he had a stud of eight, to the
great dissatisfaction of his trustee; but, as he could set his
reprehensions at nought, he gave no ear to them, but plunged into every
kind of expense, principally in dress, competing in extravagance with
the English members of the university. In the midst of this vanity, the
ingenuousness of his disposition manifested itself. He made display
among the rich foreigners, who were his associates; but, when he was
visited by his poorer friends and countrymen, who, though of noble
birth, were yet straitened in means, he was accustomed to change his
dress, to put on modest attire, and even to hide his finery, that he
might not appear to possess any superiority over them: this delicacy of
feeling extended itself to other parts of his conduct, and showed the
genuine urbanity and benevolence of his disposition.

In the autumn of 1765, he made a short journey to Genoa with his
trustee: this was the first time that he had left Piedmont; and here,
for the first time, he saw the sea, the aspect of which transported him
with admiration, and so exalted his imagination, that he says, if he had
understood any language, or had had any poetry before him, he should
certainly have composed verses. During this journey, to his infinite
delight, he visited his native town, and his mother, whom, strange to
say, he had not seen for seven years. There seems something
incomprehensible in a state of society that should admit of the
propriety, or, rather, enforce the necessity, of a boy of nine being
separated from all maternal care, and left to struggle as he might,
during the precarious season of childhood and of adolescence, without a
parent's eye to watch over his well-being, and administer to his health
and happiness. On his return to Turin, he was not a little proud among
his countrymen of his journey to Genoa; but among the English, German,
Polish and Russian students he felt the utmost rage and shame to think
that they had seen countries so much more distant. This uneasy sense of
inferiority inspired him with a passion for travelling, and made him
resolve to visit the various lands of which his comrades were natives.

In the first impulse of expectant manhood, he had petitioned to be
allowed to enter the army. As he grew older he began to find that his
liberty was dearer to him than any military parade; but, as he did not
withdraw his request, he found himself admitted, in 1766, as ensign into
the provincial regiment of Asti. He had chosen this, as the duties
attendant on it were slight, it being only required to assemble for
review for a few days twice a year: however, this necessity annoyed him,
especially as it forced him to quit the university, where he would have
been well pleased to remain; but there was no help, and he left college,
after an abode of nearly eight years. He took a small apartment in the
same house with his sister, and spent all he could in horses and all
sorts of luxuries, as well as in dinners given to his friends. A dislike
of military discipline, and a love of travelling, made him soon after
ask a year's leave of absence; and he set out for Rome and Naples under
the care of an English Catholic, who was about to make that tour, as
tutor to two young Flemish gentlemen. It was with great difficulty that
he obtained the necessary permission; the king was averse to the nobles
leaving the country, and it was only by a thousand petty artifices and
intrigues that at last he succeeded in his wishes.

Agitated by an inexplicable disquietude of mind, ignorant of all with
regard to literature and the arts, that could make travelling
interesting. Alfieri had at this time but one pleasure in a journey,
which was, going along the high road with the greatest possible speed.
His companions were as little awake to rational inquiry as himself; and
the only one among them, he tells us, who had common sense, was his
valet, who also acted as courier,--a man named Elia, who served him for
many years with the greatest fidelity. The first city at which the party
stopped was Milan. They went to see the curiosities, and visited the
Ambrosian library. The treasures of the collection were wasted upon
Alfieri: when an autograph of Petrarch was shown him (perhaps the Virgil
on whose cover the poet has recorded his passionate sorrow on the death
of Laura), he, barbarian like, pushed it away, saying, it was nothing to
him. This act did not arise from mere indifference; but partly from a
grudge he felt against Petrarch, arising from his not being able to
understand his poetry; and shame for his own ignorance took the guise of
contempt of another's genius. On visiting Florence, the only object that
called forth any emotion was the sight of Michael Angelo's tomb; when
the recollection of the fame which had been acquired by this master of
his art filled him with ideas that he could not define; and the thought
rose in his mind, that those men only were truly great, who left some
enduring monument of genius behind them. But these notions were vague
and transitory; he lived only for the present hour, even while that
afforded no one object to occupy or please him.

On leaving Florence, he hurried through Pisa and Siena; but such is the
magic of the name, that the approach to Rome made his heart palpitate,
and his torpid soul warmed into something like enthusiasm. He was
charmed by the magnificent aspect which the eternal city presents as it
is entered by the Porta del Popolo; and scarcely had he alighted at the
hotel in the Piazza di Spagna, than he hurried off co behold the wonders
of the place. Ignorance narrows the intellect, and takes the living
colours from the imagination. Alfieri, after all, regarded coldly those
objects which render Rome a city of absolute enchantment. He was best
pleased with St. Peter's. At each successive visit, the solemn vastness
of the mighty aisles of the cathedral made a deeper impression; the
splendour of the architecture, the sublime stillness of its
incense-breathing atmosphere, and the soft twilight that reigns beneath
its dome, kindled his soul to something like poetic inspiration. But
even these feelings could only for a few moments appease the
restlessness that pursued him, and he hurried away from Rome with all
the impatience of one ill at ease in himself. At Naples he grew still
more disturbed and melancholy: music, which he loved, only tended to
increase his gloom; and his reserve prevented him from forming any
intimacies. All day he drove from place to place, in those droll little
Neapolitan _calesine_, which go at such a prodigious rate under the
guidance of their Lazaroni drivers,--"Not," he says, "that I wished to
visit remarkable objects, for I had no curiosity nor knowledge about
them, but merely for the sake of being on the road: I was never satiated
of rapid motion, but a moment's quiescence filled me with annoyance."
... "And thus I lived, a riddle to myself, believing that I had
capacity for nothing; feeling no decided impulse or emotion, except a
continual melancholy; never finding peace nor quiet, yet not knowing
what I desired; blindly obeying my nature, although I neither studied
nor comprehended it. Many years afterwards I perceived that my
unhappiness proceeded from the want, nay the necessity, which I have, to
have at once my heart occupied by some worthy object, and ray mind by
some ennobling pursuit; for, whenever either of these two fail me, I
remain incapable of the other, satiated and weary, and beyond all things
miserable."

In the midst of this disturbed and unprofitable state, he nourished the
ardent desire to travel on and on, beyond the mountainous boundaries of
his country, uncontrolled and alone. For this purpose he applied to the
Sardinian minister; and, representing how correct his conduct was, and
how capable he showed himself of managing his own affairs, he besought
him to obtain leave from their sovereign, that he might detach himself
from the tutor, and proceed alone. To his great joy, his request was
complied with; and, with infinite delight, he left Naples for Rome,
eager to make use of his entire independence, and to find himself
solitary and lord of himself, on the high road, more than three hundred
miles distant from his native Piedmont.

How little does mere freedom of will satisfy the mind, when not
ministered to and filled by thoughts that go beyond the present moment.
The aimless uneasiness of Alfieri was not to be dissipated by the mere
ability of satisfying his craving for locomotion. He obtained leave of
absence for another year, and permission to visit France and England:
but the same spirit accompanied him of melancholy and ennui; and all
objects were stale and unprofitable to his languid senses. Motive was
absent; and his ardent feelings, left to prey on themselves, produced
tears and regret but no power of finding a means of exercising them with
advantage and happiness. If his ignorance was ever brought home to him,
he was rendered uncomfortable, but felt no wish to improve. He tells us
that, at Rome, he was accustomed to visit each day the count of Rivera,
minister of Sardinia,--a worthy old man, who showed him every kindness,
and gave him the best advice. One morning he found the count occupied in
reading the sixth book of the Æneid; and when Alfieri entered, he
signed to him to approach, and began to recite the beautiful lamentation
for Marcellus. Six years before, Alfieri had translated, and known by
heart, the greater part of Virgil; but he had now forgotten it, and felt
thoroughly ashamed, but with little courage to amend; so that the result
of this scene was only that he sullenly ruminated over his disgrace, and
never went near the count again. The desire of some sort of interest
drove him into a fit of avarice. He was slenderly provided with means
for his ultramontane journey; and he resolved to save all he could in
Italy, that he might not be restricted when among foreigners. He
followed up his system of parsimony with his usual ardour, and carried
it to an excess which became its cure, since he got weary of the
privations and annoyances he thus brought on himself.

From Rome he proceeded to Venice, passing through Ferrara without a
thought of Ariosto or Tasso; and Padua, without visiting either living
professors, or the tomb of the illustrious dead in the neighbourhood.
What was Petrarch to him? he again asked himself; he wrote in an unknown
tongue, of which, after all, he felt ashamed of being ignorant. He was
pleased with Venice, and was diverted by its amusements; yet the spring
season brought his usual annual fit of melancholy, and he spent many
days brooding over he knew not what, and weeping he knew not why.
Spurred on by restlessness, he hurried away from Venice: he passed
solitarily and ennuied through the beautiful cities of Lombardy, seldom
presenting letters of recommendation, and always keeping out of the way
of acquaintances: proud and shy, he hated new faces; and besides, his
desire of travelling made him avoid the ties of friendship and even of
love, though once or twice the smiles of beauty almost softened his
heart. All his desire was to hasten to France, and to enjoy the delights
he there promised himself. He was destined to be disappointed; for his
ill-regulated imagination always exaggerated the pains and pleasures of
the future, while it did not possess the better power of exalting and
adorning the objects which in anticipation had appeared so desirable,
and which in possession grew contemptible and barren.

One of the singularities of Alfieri's character was the extravagant
hatred of France which he cherished all his life. He attributed this, in
the first place, to a vehement childish dislike of his French
dancing-master. Still he read nothing but French books, French was the
language he commonly spoke, and he left Italy in eager anticipation of
the pleasures of Paris. But Alfieri did not know his own nature; nor was
he aware that he could find happiness through the medium of his passions
and intellect only, while amusement and even dissipation had the effect
of wearying and disgusting him. The circumstance of his first entrance
into Paris sufficed to cloud his stay; nay, the feelings of his whole
life were influenced by the painful impression then made. It was the
month of August, in Italy so sunshiny and festal; a drizzling rain,
accompanied by a chilling temperature of air, impressed him most
disagreeably; the streets, houses, and people were all mean, dirty, and
impertinent in his eyes; his illusions vanished, and, but for a sense of
shame, he would on the instant have quitted the city he had come so far
to visit. The lapse of a quarter of a century did not erase the profound
traces of disgust and aversion that were then trenched in his mind. At
the time, the principal effect of his disappointment was a little to
diminish his passion for travelling; and to find that, beyond the Alps,
he learned to appreciate the beauties of the divine country he had been
so eager to quit.

He delayed his departure from Paris till January, and then hurried to
London, which delighted as much as Paris had disgusted him; and he thus
gives evidence of a fact of which many English, who have travelled, must
be aware--that there is something in Italy and the Italians, in the
rural beauty of the country, and in the unpretending but highly gifted
natives, more congenial to our taste, than in the peculiar habits and
manners of the French. Industry does here, in beautifying the landscape,
what nature does beyond the Alps; while in France, there is a discomfort
and a desolation apparent in the midst of its civilisation and plenty,
which is singularly disagreeable. In this country, the roads, the inns,
the horses, the women, all charmed Alfieri; the appearance of general
competence, the activity of life, and the cleanliness and comfort of the
houses, diminutive as they struck him to be, made an agreeable
impression, which each successive visit renewed. Yet he led a strange
life--avoiding society, although in the midst of it. He had been
accompanied from Paris by a friend; and he amused himself, each morning,
by driving him about town, and acting the coachman for him at night,
sitting on the box for hours, and taking pride in his dexterity in
extricating his carriage amidst the difficulties and confusion attendant
on the vast multitude of equipages that throng round places of amusement
during the London season. This did for a little while; then, in
obedience to his wandering propensity, he made a tour to Portsmouth,
Bristol, and Oxford. He was pleased with all he saw; and began to
entertain a wish to settle in a country whose aspect was so agreeable,
where the manners were simple, the women modest and beautiful, the laws
equitable, and the men free. The enthusiasm he felt, made him disregard
the melancholy generated by the gloomy climate, and the ruinous expense
of living. He observes, and with justice, that Italy and England are the
only countries in which it is desirable to live: the former, because
there nature vindicates her rights, and rises triumphant over the evils
produced by the governments; the latter, because art conquers nature,
and transforms a rude ungenial land into a paradise of comfort and
laughing abundance.

In June, he left England for Holland; and at the Hague for the first
time became really in love, and at the same time his heart opened itself
to friendship. The lady whom he admired, and who returned his affection,
was unfortunately a married woman, but an Italian education and habits
prevented any scruples of conscience from interrupting the felicity he
enjoyed. His friend was Don José d'Alcunha, Portuguese minister in
Holland. Alfieri describes him as clever and original, with a cultivated
understanding and firm unbending character: with tact and efficacy the
Portuguese awoke in his new friend shame for his idle, aimless life. It
was a curious circumstance, he tells us, that he never felt a strong
desire for mental improvement, except at such periods as when he was
passionately in love, and his time so employed that he could bestow none
of it on literature. In process of time, when he became worthily
attached, he may have perceived in this, the beneficent action of the
passions in our nature, when their objects are what they ought to
be--ennobling and permanent.

After a period of great happiness, he was forced to separate from the
lady to whom he was attached,--she being obliged to join her husband,
who had gone to Switzerland; and Alfieri suffered the mildest of the
punishments that result from loving one to whom you cannot consecrate
your life. But though a separation, attended neither by disastrous
incident nor infidelity, is the gentlest penance for such an error, it
visited the young Italian in no gentle manner. It was a natural wish, as
any one will acknowledge who has attended to his own sensations, on
first being subjected to passionate sorrow, that which he formed--for
being bled: prevented by his friend and a faithful servant from allowing
this bleeding to be fatal, his grief became gloomy and taciturn; Holland
grew hateful to him; and he returned to Italy with the utmost
speed--never resting till he found himself at Cumiano, in his sister's
villa, after a three weeks' journey, during which time he saw nothing
and said nothing, communicating only by signs with his faithful servant,
Elia, who never lost sight of him, and bore with exemplary patience his
caprices and heedless tyranny.

This state of melancholy regret augmented his love of solitude, and
engendered, moreover, a desire to study: he passed the winter at Turin,
in his sister's house, seeing absolutely no society, and spending his
time in reading. He turned over the pages of Voltaire, Rousseau,
Helvetius, and Montesquieu; but his chief delight was derived from the
perusal of Plutarch's lives. His mind was strongly excited by the heroic
virtues of the great men of whom he read, and tears of mingled
admiration and indignation gushed from his eyes. He felt the misfortune
it was to be a native of Piedmont; and to have been born in a country,
and at a time, when no scope was afforded for word or action, scarcely
any for thought and feeling.

In the spring of 1769 he set out on another and a longer tour. He had
been disappointed in a matrimonial project, proposed to him by his
brother-in-law. The young lady was rich and beautiful, but she preferred
a handsome young courtier to a man already remarkable for the
eccentricity of his conduct and the sombreness of his disposition: for
Alfieri, withdrawn from the common routine of society by his passionate
and earnest nature, could but awkwardly and reluctantly fulfil the
thousand minute duties which an Italian is accustomed to pay to his
lady; nor, on this occasion, did love inspire him with that devotion of
heart which might have proved acceptable in lieu of petty attentions. He
was now twenty, and, according to the laws of his country, of age--so
that his entire fortune was at his disposal: this consisted of an income
of 2500 sequins, or about 1200_l_. a year, and a large sum of ready
money; and, to augment the value of his possessions, he had acquired the
habits of rational economy, which sprang from the scantiness of the
allowance which his prudent trustee had made him. Thus he set out with
"money in his purse," and no love in his heart, except the tender
recollection of his half-extinguished Flemish flame; and if with a head
not much fuller of ideas, yet with a thousand sentiments awakened, which
afforded matter for thought. As he drove along, he read Montaigne, or
reflected on what he read--a little galled by finding that he could not
construe the Latin quotations, and still more so by being obliged to
skip the Italian ones. Vienna and Berlin were hastily visited, and seen
without pleasure: he had beheld the results of liberty in England, and
he had read of them in Plutarch, and his natural sense of independence
made him revolt from the military despotisms of the north. Instinctive
good sense served him better than the philosophy of Voltaire, and he
recognised the cloven foot of arbitrary power in the barrack capital of
the philosopher of Sans Souçi. He hurried away from these mockeries of
liberalism, and found more pleasure in the simplicity of the Swedes: the
contrast which barren nature afforded, in these frozen regions, to the
luxuriance and glory of Italy interested and pleased him; the velocity
of his sledge, as he proceeded through the silent pine forests, and over
the ice-covered lakes, fostered an agreeable melancholy; and he
describes his spring journey from Sweden to St. Petersburgh with a
vividness and beauty which it would spoil to abridge. Embarking at the
first breaking up of the frost on the Gulf of Bothnia, his boat had to
struggle through the floating ice; and the novelty of his situation was
a source of amusement. "This is the country of Europe," he says, "most
agreeable to me, from its savage rudeness; fantastic, gloomy, and even
sublime, ideas are created in the mind by the vast, undefinable silence
that reigns there, making you feel as if transported away from the
globe." St. Petersburgh disappointed him; nor would he see the empress
Catherine, whom he regarded as the murderess of her husband, and whose
conduct--having failed in her promise of bestowing a constitution on her
subjects--was unredeemed, in his eyes, by any mitigating circumstances.

From Russia he traversed Germany to Holland, and again visited England.
His time, during his second visit to this country, was engrossed by an
attachment for a lady of rank, who proved herself not only unworthy of
the affection of the husband whom she betrayed, but the lover to whom
she was false. The more violent passions of Alfieri were all roused to
their utmost vehemence by the various chances of this adventure, which
was attended by all those hairbreadth escapes, menacing dangers, and
final ruin and misery, which usually wait upon intrigue in England.
First it was love, accompanied by the "sin and fear" which attends on
mystery and deceit; then separation came to drive him to despair. The
London season over, the lady went to her country house near Windsor; and
Alfieri could only visit her clandestinely, on such nights when her
husband was absent in London. His impatience and agony during the
periods of separation were only appeased by excessive exercise: he rode
about all day, performing such feats of horsemanship as endangered his
life. Leaping a five-barred gate, with his thoughts wandering to his
lady, instead of being fixed on his bridle-hand, his horse fell on him,
and dislocated his shoulder; but that did not prevent a visit to Windsor
on the following evening, the last that he was destined to make. The
servants observed and watched him, and the husband of the lady had
intelligence of her infidelity; "and here," he writes, "it is impossible
not to laugh at the contrast between English and Italian jealousy, so
different are the passions in different characters, in another climate,
and, above all, under other laws. Every Italian would now expect to hear
of blows, poison, stabs, or, at least, of the imprisonment of the lady,
under such violent provocation: nothing of all this happened, though the
English husband adored his wife after his manner." It was much according
to the present customs, that the English husband, besides instituting
legal proceedings against his wife and her lover, called out the latter.
The duel was, however, a very harmless proceeding: Alfieri could not
fence, and his adversary was satisfied by merely drawing blood by a
scratch in the arm, carefully abstaining from inflicting the wound or
death which he had it in his power to bestow. A far deeper and more
painful wound was reserved for the Italian, when he learned how grossly
the lady had deceived him. A groom of her husband had formerly been her
lover: he still lived in the house; and, fearing that his lord would
risk his life in an encounter with Alfieri, he hastened to inform him
that the lady was totally unworthy such a chivalrous encounter. All
these disgraceful circumstances came out on the trial. Alfieri, maddened
and enraged, was yet unable, at first, to separate from his treacherous
mistress. They travelled together in England, he furious at his own
weakness, and perpetually struggling to vanquish it; till, seizing on a
moment when shame and indignation were stronger than love, he left her
at Rochester, on her way to France with a relative, and returned to
London. In after times, the chief impression left on his mind from this
adventure was, a feeling of mixed respect and gratitude towards her
husband, who spared both his life and his purse, neither killing him,
nor demanding damages: the first the English noble, apparently, had at
his mercy; but it is unlikely, under all the circumstances, that the
latter should have been awarded him, to any great extent.

After tempests like these, it was long before the impetuous and
sensitive soul of Alfieri settled into any thing like calm: paroxysms of
rage, love, grief, and despair succeeded one to the other, and his only
relief was derived from locomotion. He left London, and after visiting
his friend Alcunha at the Hague, he hurried on to Paris; he traversed
France, and entered Spain, struggling with the passion that warred
within him, and devoured by the gloomiest melancholy. At Barcelona he
bought two Spanish horses, and with these resolved to proceed on his
journey to Madrid. His carriage went on first, under the care of the
servants and muleteers; and he followed, chiefly on foot, his beautiful
Andalusian trotting beside him with the docility of a dog. This mixture
of idleness and change--of solitude and independence--soothed his
disturbed mind. He was given up to endless reverie, now engrossed by
melancholy and moral trains of thought; now possessed by images wild,
terrible, or gay. He knew no language, and could express nothing that he
felt--all was confused and vague, and mingled with violent transports of
grief and despair. He spoke to no one; and his taciturn, self-devouring
misery irritated him almost to madness. His faithful servant, Elia, who
followed him during all his journeys, had nearly become the victim to an
explosion of the pent-up volcano. In combing the count's long
tresses,--which it was the fashion then to wear,--he accidentally pulled
one hair; and Alfieri, starting up like lightning, hurled a candlestick
at his head, which struck him on the temple and inflicted a wound.
Elia's Italian nature was roused, and he flew on his master. Other
people interfered, and no more harm was done. Alfieri told his servant
that he might kill him if he chose: he deserved it, and would take no
precautions against his vengeance; and he praises his own courage in
thus exposing himself, and the magnanimity of the man for not rising in
the night and murdering him as he slept. The whole scene is inexplicable
to our northern imaginations, and borders on the excesses of savage
nature. "It would be difficult for any one," says Alfieri, "to
understand the mixture of ferociousness and generosity on both sides,
who has not had experience of the manners and hot blood of the
Piedmontese."

After a journey through Spain and Portugal more savage, wild, and
solitary than was even his wont.
[Sidenote: 1772.
Ætat.
23.]
Alfieri returned to Turin; and here he seemed to be in greater danger
than he had ever been of losing all the exaltation of character and
feeling that clung to him despite his excesses, his ignorance, and the
total absence of all mental culture. He took a magnificent house, and
fitted it up with luxury and taste. He had a circle of friends, who
formed themselves into a society, with laws and regulations. One of
their amusements was a sort of literary budget, to which the various
members contributed writings for the recreation of the general society.
Alfieri wrote several papers, which obtained a good deal of applause: he
had a turn for satire, and that is always a popular style of writing in
a coterie. These compositions were all in French.

A worse degradation than this sort of vegetative dissipation awaited the
count: he became a cavaliere servente. The lady was of rank, a good deal
older than himself, but of extraordinary beauty. She was noted for her
gallantries; and Alfieri, who was not in love, her style of beauty even
not being exactly to his taste, was drawn in, at first, by mere
idleness, and a belief in the excessive attachment she bore him. Soon a
most vehement passion engrossed him. Friends, diversions, even horses,
were neglected; from eight in the morning till twelve at night he was
continually with her--discontented with his servitude, but unable to
stay away.

It is difficult to understand, and impossible to sympathise with, the
sort of frenzy he describes. He did not esteem the lady, and he despised
himself for the humiliating state to which he was reduced. The situation
of a cavaliere servente is, we are told by high English authority in
such matters, "no sinecure." To be constantly in attendance is its chief
duty. A cavaliere sits with his lady, drives with her, walks with her,
goes to assemblies and the opera with her: he follows her like her
shadow, and no matrimonial exigence can equal the total abnegation of
all independent occupation to which the cavaliere must submit. The lady,
indeed, may equally become weary; but an Italian woman is used to this
excess of indolence. Her life is monotonous, her passage from one
amusement to the other invariable, sameness forming the essence of her
existence: nothing animates it except love, scandal, or quarrelling:
these, and the natural vivacity of southern blood, which can diversify
the indolence which would otherwise mantle over and incrust every
faculty. But all this was torture to the fiery spirit of the count, who,
born for better things, struggled with his fetters, and roared like a
lion in the toils. His slavery lasted for two years. At one time, the
nervous irritation produced a violent and inexplicable malady, which the
wits of Turin declared he had invented exclusively for himself. He was
unable for several days to swallow aliment in any shape; and the
convulsions brought on by any attempt to force it on him almost deprived
him of life. At another time, he acquired resolution enough to scheme a
journey to Milan, and actually set out; but scarcely had he passed the
gates of Turin than his heart failed him, and he returned, burning with
indignation against himself, to resume his chains. His friends saw and
pitied his miserable state, and their compassion aggravated his
sufferings, while it did not enable him to rise above the enthralment.
Day after day, month after month, he formed new resolves to extricate
himself, and for a long time in vain.

At length, in the February of 1775, being now twenty-six years of age,
he, in desperation, came to a determination to break off the disgraceful
intercourse. His old remedy of change of place had proved of no avail,
so he resolved to remain on the same spot; to shut himself up in his own
house, which was opposite that of the lady, but to receive no letters,
hear no messages, and to be induced by no failing of the heart ever to
behold her more. In token of his fixed purpose, he cut off his long
hair, and sent it to a friend, as a proof that he could not present
himself in society so shorn and disfigured.

And now a better day dawned on the tempest of passion that darkened his
soul. In Lisbon he had been acquainted with the abate Caluso, a man of
learning and talent, who had, in some degree, awakened in him a desire
for knowledge, while, with the utmost forbearance and kindness, he tried
to lighten the shame inspired by every glimmering light that displayed
his excessive ignorance. They had passed many long evenings together,
and Alfieri preferred his instructive but unpretending conversation to
the gaieties of society; and here he felt an awakening of that dormant
power of composition which afterwards was to expand into worthy and
perennial fruit. In Turin, also, he was acquainted with several
literati; and now, a voluntary prisoner, and passing many long hours in
entire solitude, unaware and almost unsought, a true, strong, and
enduring love of knowledge sprang up within him, never after to be
weakened or destroyed. The first token of the spirit of composition, was
a sonnet in commemoration of the freedom he had acquired. Some years
before, in Paris, he had bought a collection of Italian poets, and by
reading them had gained a slight knowledge of versification, and of his
native language; yet so ludicrously imperfect was this, that, when he
showed his sonnet to a literary man, the first advice he received was to
learn to spell. Orthography, grammar, and rhythm were alike defective in
his production. He was not discouraged. This same friend, father
Paciaudi, had given him the "Cleopatra" of cardinal Delfino. Alfieri
fancied that he could write a better tragedy himself; and he began one
on the same subject. He consulted his friends upon it, and tried to gain
some instruction as to style and poetic laws, of which, hitherto, he had
remained in profound ignorance. His house became a sort of academy;
while he, desirous of learning, but proud and indocile, wearied himself
and all around him by his alternate fits of industry and despondency. At
length, a tragedy and a farce were the result of his endeavours, and
both were acted on the same nights, at the theatre of Turin, with
applause, on two consecutive evenings, and were given out for a third
representation. But Alfieri by this time began to discover the entire
want of merit of these productions: which prove, as we may judge from
the passages he has preserved, that ideas and feelings are of no avail
in composition, where there is a total absence of style, and an absolute
incapacity of finding language in which to clothe the naked and unformed
conceptions of the brain. On the third night, therefore, Alfieri
prevented the representation; and on the same night he was seized by so
vehement and burning a wish to deserve the applause of an audience,
that, he tells us, no fever of love had ever assailed him with similar
impetuosity.

"And thus," he says, "at the age of seven and twenty, I entered into the
difficult engagement with the public and myself to become a writer of
tragedies; and these were the props I had to sustain me in my
undertaking,--a resolved, obstinate, and untamed spirit; a heart boiling
over with all sorts of emotions, among which predominated the transports
of love, and a profound and indignant abhorrence of every species of
tyranny; a very slight recollection of the French tragedies I had seen
acted, having read and studied none; an entire ignorance of the rules of
the drama; and a total incapacity to command the language of which I
made use;--all this was surrounded by a husk, not so much of
presumption, as of petulance, and an impetuosity of character which
stood in the way of my ever, except with reluctance, acknowledging,
investigating, or giving ear to truth."

The first thing he found he had to do, was to apply himself to a
spelling-book and grammar: this necessity was not admitted without a
struggle; but the ardour of his enthusiasm enabled him to triumph over
these petty but perplexing and irritating obstacles; and he gave himself
up to the study of language with a mixture of impatience and
perseverance that kept his mind in a perpetual tumult. He was under the
necessity of driving away all French words and forms of speech from his
mind, and of imbuing his thoughts in the idiom of Tuscany,--a work of
unspeakable labour, uniting the studies of a man with those of a child,
and sufficient to have overcome the resolution of any temper less ardent
and ambitious than his own. After all, it must be acknowledged that it
was to a great degree an insuperable difficulty; and, though overcome,
in appearance, by Alfieri, yet in composition he had always two
labours,--that of giving birth to ideas, and that of examining with the
attention and scepticism of a foreigner the words in which he clothed
them. This, perhaps, is the cause, that although, in process of time,
his prose style became unexceptionable, and that of his tragedies full
of fire and strength, his lyrics are such lamentable failures.

For nearly a year he was given up to the ungrateful task of clearing
away the rubbish of another language, and placing the foundation stones
of a pure and classic Italian. He retired to a village near Turin, that
his attention might not be called off; and there, with a literary
friend, he laboured at all that nauseates a schoolboy, with the still
greater disgust of mere verbal difficulties which is felt by a man.
After a year of much industry, he began to be aware that he should never
attain his object as long as he merely translated himself from the
French, which had become the language of his thoughts; and he resolved
to pass six months in Tuscany, to learn, to hear, speak, think, and feel
Tuscan only.

In this journey he sought the acquaintance of the first literary men,
and exerted himself strenuously to acquire the knowledge of which he was
so deficient. He never deceived himself by fancying his deficiencies
were less than they were. He was born endowed with genius; uncultivated
and empty of all knowledge as his mind was, yet it was filled with
thought and feeling, and, during his solitary journeys and long
incommunicative days of reverie, he had studied his own character. At
one time he had kept a journal, in which he put down not only his
actions, but their motives, investigating his moral nature in its inmost
recesses. This was an exercise of mind which, joined to his natural
talent, peculiarly adapted him to developement of feeling and motive,
which is the essence of the tragic art; and it was towards this species
composition that, from the first, he felt himself irresistibly impelled.

He had now fully entered on his dramatic enterprise. Several months
before, he had written his tragedies of "Philip" and "Polinices," in
French prose, which with unwearied industry, he put into Italian verse
three or four several times; endeavouring to form a rhythm adapted to
dialogue, and to concentrate and simplify his style as much as possible.
While studying Italian, he had also applied himself to re-learning
Latin; and the tragedies of Seneca suggested other subjects. "Antigone,"
"Agamemnon," "Orestes," and "Don Garzia," were all conceived, and in
part written, while he was indefatigable in the labour, it cannot so
well be said of polishing his language, as of modelling and remodelling
it, as his greater use of Tuscan, and his critical taste suggested.

He had now an aim in life, from the pursuit of which he never deviated,
but followed it up with incredible enthusiasm and perseverance. His
labours were great in literature, yet confined chiefly to the formation
of style; and he translated Sallust, and other Latin authors, for the
sake of improving in force and conciseness.
[Sidenote: 1777.
Ætat.
28.]
He did not continue in one place: after a few months spent at Florence,
he returned to Turin, recalled by the love of his friends and his stud:
but during the following spring he obtained the necessary permission of
the king to quit Piedmont and return to Tuscany, for the purpose of
imbibing at the purest source that energetic and concise language, which
he considered yielded in elegance and force of expression to no other in
the world.

As the city where the purest Tuscan is spoken. Alfieri visited Siena,
and spent the summer there. He there formed an intimacy which served to
encourage him in his laborious pursuits; for he tells us he was never
capable of arduous and sustained undertakings, except when the feelings
of his heart were exercised by an intercourse of friendship or love.
Francesco Gori was of ignoble birth, and his ostensible pursuits were
those of traffic, which he pursued more for the sake of pleasing his
family than for gain. In the obscurity of his warehouse he occupied
himself with classical literature, and nurtured an admirable and
delicate taste for the fine arts. Extreme philanthropy formed the
essence of his character, and a warm-hearted sympathy, that led him to
forgive and love all mankind. The idle and opulent nobles of the city
could not, by their worthlessness, excite his hatred or contempt. With
Tacitus in his hand, and the pure love of liberty in his heart, how
could he hate the victims of tyranny? he might exclaim, with a poet of
modern days, whose political principles were equally derived from the
sensibility of his heart,--


"I hate thy want of love and truth:
How should I then hate thee?"


Self-knowledge deracinated pride in himself, and contempt for others;
and thus, humbly occupied in his shop, he could extend forbearance to
all, except the primal causes of the degradation of his countrymen;
while his only happiness was derived from books, and his chief grief
from comparing himself and his times with the men and times of which he
read.

There is a simplicity in Italian manners that renders the friendship
between count Alfieri and Gori, the mercer, by no means extraordinary.
To the sympathy produced by an agreement in opinions was added the
respect which Alfieri felt for the virtuous qualities of his
unpretending friend. Their talk was of the ancient glory of their
country, and of the literary ambition of Alfieri. In the course of
conversation, Gori suggested the conspiracy of the Pazzi as a good
subject for a tragedy. Alfieri was ignorant of the history of the
republic of Florence, and had never heard of the Pazzi. Gori placed the
Florentine annals of Machiavelli in his hands. Machiavelli (whatever his
motives were for writing "The Prince") was an enthusiastic republican.
He tells us in his letters, that while writing the history, he delighted
himself by exposing the conduct of the princes who had ruined Italy: his
spirit of freedom found an echo in Alfieri's heart, and so sharpened his
hatred of despotism, and his love of liberty, that, throwing aside his
tragedies, he wrote a treatise on tyranny,--a work of eloquence, but
rather a juvenile ebullition of feeling, than an argumentative essay.

On the advance of winter, Alfieri transferred himself to Florence; and
here an event happened that altered the colour of his future life,
through the influence of a constant attachment, which, accompanied by
esteem for the good qualities and talents of its object, remained fixed
in his heart to the end of his life.

Louisa de Stolberg, countess of Albany, was at that time twenty-five
years of age, beautiful and full of talent. Her rank and wealth gave her
a distinguished place in society. She was the wife of the last of the
Stuarts who made pretensions to the throne of England, who unfortunately
disgraced his illustrious house, and even the private station to which
he was reduced, by habits the most deplorable. Alfieri now regarded his
future prospects as fixed: he had long determined never to marry,
considering that, under the despotic government to which he was a
subject, the ties of husband and father would add weight to the chains
imposed upon him: attached for life to a woman whom he esteemed worthy
of him, and beyond all things ambitious of distinguishing himself as an
author and a defender of the cause of liberty, he began to put into
execution the schemes which had long presented themselves to his
imagination, for acquiring entire personal freedom. The nobles of
Piedmont were in a peculiarly enslaved state: they could not quit the
territories of their sovereign except by especial leave, granted for a
limited time; nor could they publish any writings in a foreign country,
without the licence of their native prince, under penalty of a fine, and
even imprisonment, "if" (so the law was expressed) "it was necessary to
make a public example." These shackles were intolerable to a man of
independent mind, bent upon giving testimony of his abhorrence of
despotic rule: but few men would have freed themselves at the cost that
Alfieri paid. He came to a resolve to make a donation of the whole of
his property to his sister Julia, reserving to himself only the annual
income of 1400 sequins, or about 600_l_. a year, the half of his actual
receipt. To execute this design, the king's permission was necessary,
who readily gave it, "being," says Alfieri, "as willing to get rid of me
as I was to emancipate myself from his authority."

The transfer, however, was not completed without a good deal of
annoyance; and Alfieri was irritated, at one time, into making a
declaration, that, if his brother-in-law would not receive the donation,
he must the count's abandonment of his whole property; and that he would
resign his claim to every possession rather than be fettered by the laws
attendant upon keeping it. In the exaltation of his imagination, he
almost imagined that this latter offer would be acted on; and, finding
himself reduced to merely a few thousand sequins of ready money, he fell
into his second fit of avarice, selling his horses, and all his
superfluous plate, furniture, and even dress, renouncing the Sardinian
uniform, to which he had adhered, from boyish vanity, even after
quitting the service. He spent a good deal of money in books; but this
was his sole expense; while his abstemiousness of living, directed by
economy, became of the most rigid kind. Thus, even in extremes, resolved
never to marry, resolved to be an author, he completed sacrifices, which
a thousand circumstances might afterwards have caused him to regret, but
which, he assures us, he never for a moment repented. He did not confide
the secret of this change in his affairs to the countess until it was
past recal; for, as their ultimate effect was to render their union more
stable and permanent, he felt that she might consider it right, as a
mark of her disinterestedness, to oppose them. When all was over, her
blame was of no avail, and she forgave the mystery he had practised.

These various annoyances, joined to the perturbations of love, and the
ardour of his literary application, occasioned an illness from which he
only recovered when the season of summer brought that healthiness of
feeling, that lightness of spirit, and that energy for composition,
which summer and its heats always imparted to his constitution. During
this summer, Alfieri, as he tells us, "in a frantic delirium of a love
of freedom," wrote his tragedy of the "Pazzi," and that of "Mary Stuart"
(Mary Queen of Scots); the latter at the request of the countess of
Albany. During the following year he completed these and made the first
sketch of "Rosmunda," "Ottavia," and "Timoleon." Since his tragedies
have become so numerous, and many of his best are written, it will be as
well to glance over them, and to give some account of his progress and
success in an art to which he devoted his life and fortune.

Energy and conciseness are the distinguishing marks of Alfieri's dramas.
Wishing to bring the whole action of the piece into one focus, he
rejected altogether the confidantes of the French theatre, so that his
dramatis personæ are limited to the principals themselves. The
preservation of the unities of time and place also contributed to
curtail all excrescences; so that his tragedies are short, and all hear
upon one point only, which he considered the essence of unity of action.
Thus, in the "Merope," there are but four interlocutors, the queen and
her son, his foster-father, and the tyrant. Instead, therefore, as is
the case in the French dramas, of the action being carried on by a
perpetual talk about it, at once tedious and unnatural, the interest is
always at its height between the parties themselves; and it is singular,
in the "Merope" in particular, with what talent and success he keeps the
action in perpetual progress, and the passions developed by such slender
means. It was the turn of Alfieri's character to consider it a duty in
an author rather to conquer difficulties than to acquire facilities. He
would read no other tragedians, for fear of imitating them, and
abstained from a perusal of the great master of the art, Shakspeare,
from the same mistaken notion. Genius need not fear to be imitative; but
genius, unaided by cultivation, and by a study of what has gone before,
can never surpass what is already written: it were as if a scientific
man were to refuse to be initiated in the discoveries of science, that
he might pursue his labours in a new and original path. Thus he might,
we will say, re-invent gunpowder and printing, but never a new law and a
new power. To use a more homely illustration, it were as if an
agriculturist refused to manure the ground, and was bent on forcing the
native soil, to produce by labour what would arise with greater
fertility and ease if aided by extraneous nutriment. It is a law of
mechanics, never to waste power, but to proportionate on all occasions
the means to the end. If, instead of refusing to read the finest
dramatic works, Alfieri had studied in them the genius and essence of
the art; he might; instead of simply restricting his invention to the
bald and inconclusive expedient of contracting the personages of his
drama, have invented some original method of combining the simplicity of
design consequent on an observance of the unities, with a more natural
and inforced arrangement of plot, and with a greater variety and truth
of character.

The great distinction between Shakspeare and almost every other dramatic
writer arises from his developement and variety of character: all his
personages are individuals. In other authors, we have a lover, an
ambitious man, a tyrant, or a victim of tyranny; but in Shakspeare it is
not the passion that makes the man, but the peculiar character of the
person that gives reality and life to the passion. Thus Richard III. and
Macbeth are both ambitious; but how differently do their respective
dispositions modulate their conduct and feelings! The cruel, remorseless
Richard can never, in a single line he utters, be mistaken for the weak,
vacillating usurper, whose cruelties result from the necessities of his
situation, and not from inborn ferocity of character. Juliet, Imogen,
and Rosalind, are alike girls in love; but how variously do they display
their sentiments! the ardent Italian, the fond, devoted wife, and the
sprightly, spirited daughter of an exiled prince, are all individuals
characterised by distinctive marks; so that a painter would give to each
a physiognomy utterly dissimilar the one from the other. If Alfieri had
read Shakspeare, he might have discovered and appreciated this
incomparable mark of his excellence; and his knowledge of the human
heart would have led him to imitate a model which, if succeeded in,
could not, from its very nature, bear any resemblance to mere
plagiarism. He himself felt that one tyrant should not quite resemble
another, nor one lover be but the mirror of another: but so it is with
him, with few exceptions--situation, not character, forms the interest
of his pieces.

Besides this, Alfieri was not an imaginative poet: his sonnets and
longer poems are failures; his tragedies are vacant of ideal imagery;
his sensible objects are never animated by a soul infused into them by
the speaker; his daggers and poisons, and all the other tragic
paraphernalia, are the mere things themselves--the poet's eye never
gives "to airy nothing a local habitation and a name." His inventive
powers consisted in being able to conceive situations of passion and
interest, and giving to his personages feelings and language at once
natural, powerful, and pathetic.

His mode of writing his tragedies shows, indeed, how spontaneous was his
conception of the action of a piece, how mechanical the effort by which
he clothed it in verse. He was accustomed to throw off the design of the
intended action in a sketch of a few pages, and then to lay it by: after
an interval, he read this sketch, and, if it pleased him, he arranged
the plot into acts, and scenes, and speeches, putting down every idea
that presented itself, and the whole in prose; and again he put aside
his labour for future consideration. If, on reading it over, he felt his
imagination warmed and excited, and the ideas renew themselves in his
mind vividly and forcibly, then he completed his work by versifying it.
This is not the routine which a genuine poet follows: something of the
improvisatore's art is inherent in him, and he writes "in numbers, for
the numbers come."

"Philip" was the first of Alfieri's tragedies: it was originally written
in French prose; and he was so well pleased with its conduct, that he
was never weary of composing and recomposing it in Italian verse, till
he was satisfied that the language was equal in vigour to the ideas it
expressed. The subject of "Philip" is the death of don Carlos, prince of
Spain; and the contrast of character in the three principal persons is
finely conceived and well executed. There is the obdurate, deceitful,
cruel tyrant. His son, educated near him, in perpetual fear and
suspicion, is never his dupe: he sees through all his subterfuges, and
perceives the snares laid for him in his pretended mercies; and love,
while it causes him to expose himself to his father's vengeance, only
renders him doubly watchful and cautious. Isabella, on the contrary, a
daughter of France, at the same time that, from feminine delicacy, she
is more restrained in her feelings, yet is unsuspicious, unguarded, and
ready to give credit to the professions of those around. Her heart opens
itself readily to hope; while that of her lover is impassive to every
delusion, and he regards with terror and grief the peril to which, in
her generous trustingness of nature, she heedlessly exposes herself.

As the genius of Alfieri led him to depict the passions in their
simplest though most energetic form, unaccompanied by the influence of
manners, the metaphysical subtleties of Shakspeare, or the wild, but
deeply interesting intricacy of plot of Calderon and our old dramatists,
so classical subjects were treated by him with peculiar felicity.
"Agamemnon" and "Orestes" are among his best dramas: the dignity and
tenderness of Electra, the remorse and struggles of Clytemnestra, and
the haughty, rash disposition of Orestes, have more of truth, of nature,
and grace than is to be found among any modern tragedies on similar
subjects: but this very simplicity becomes, to a certain degree,
baldness in modern subjects; and though the conspiracy of the "Pazzi"
was written, he says, with a delirious enthusiasm for liberty, there is
a want of developement and relief that renders it more like the sketch
of a tragedy, than one filled out in all its parts. "Virginia," equally
pregnant with the spirit of liberty, has more grace and more pathos.

While the mind of Alfieri was thus fully occupied by the composition of
his dramas, he was happy in the enjoyment of the friendship and love of
the persons dearest to him in the world. He was the _amico di casa_ of
the countess of Albany; that is, he spent his evenings in her society,
and attended her in mornings during her visits and excursions: he kept
up a constant correspondence with Gori, at Siena; and the abbate Caluso,
the friend who had first awakened his desire for literary composition,
many years before, at Lisbon, and to whom he was warmly attached, came
from Turin, and spent a whole year at Florence, that he might enjoy his
society. But the tranquil course of happiness is seldom allowed to human
beings, especially when they feel and acknowledge their perfect
well-being, and repose content on the accomplishment of their desires.
The conduct of the unfortunate prince, who was the countess of Albany's
husband, poisoned every enjoyment, and, at last, forced his wife to
separate herself from him. Given up to the most degrading vice,--in his
drunken fits his ferocity and madness endangered her life, and she lived
night and day, haunted by the terror inspired by his outrages. Alfieri
exerted himself to obtain permission from the government for their
separation; and, that being obtained, she retired to a convent in
Florence, and afterwards, under the sanction of the pope, she removed to
another convent at Rome.

Alfieri found that thus he had succeeded in saving the life of his
friend; but the separation necessary to prevent any injurious opinions
being formed as to the motives of his interference, was a cruel reward
for his exertions. Florence grew hateful to him in her absence; he
became incapable of every occupation, and his whole thoughts were bent
on contriving their re-union: it was matter of difficulty, but not
insuperable to his earnest endeavours. After some months, the pope
allowed her to quit her convent, and to take up her abode in the palace
of cardinal York; and Alfieri, having already quitted Florence and spent
some time at Naples, ventured at last to fix himself at Rome also,
having, as he tells us, paid court, made visits, and employed a thousand
servile and humiliating arts, from which his nature revolted, to obtain
the sufferance of the pope for his residence in the same city as the
countess. No honours, no glory, no worldly advantage, could have induced
him to submit to what he considered the excess of meanness and
degradation; love alone exalted the debasement in his eyes.

Now again he was happy: he lived at the villa Strozzi, near the baths of
Dioclesian. He spent the long mornings in study, never leaving his house
except to ride over the solitary and uncultivated country around Rome,
whose immense and lonely expanse invited him to reverie and poetic
composition. He spent the evenings with the countess, retiring at eleven
to his tranquil home, which, divided from all others, rural though in
the city, and surrounded by objects of antique grandeur and natural
beauty, was an abode such as Rome only in the world can afford, and
peculiarly adapted to the noble poet's temper, character, and
occupations.

His imagination received its happiest inspirations during this period.
Besides continual labour on his former compositions, he wrote the
tragedies of "Merope" and "Saul," both conceived and executed with a
fervour of inspiration that allowed him no pause between the various
operations into which he divided the composition of a tragedy. The
"Merope" was written in a sort of indignant burst, to prove that the
tragedy of Maffei on the subject, could be easily surpassed. The "Saul"
emanated from reading the Bible, in the study of which he at that time
occupied himself, and which awoke in him a desire to write several
dramas on scriptural subjects; had it not been that, fond of forming
resolutions and of adopting voluntary chains, since he cast away and
abhorred all others, he had determined to limit his tragedies to twelve.
The "Saul" and "Merope" caused him to exceed this number by two; but he
would not be allured to go beyond.

The "Saul" is, there can be little question, the chef-d'oeuvre of
Alfieri: character forms the basis of the interest, and the situations
are deeply pathetic. Saul, in some degree, reminds the reader of king
Lear. The Hebrew king is not, like Shakspeare's dethroned monarch,
thrust from his state, and turned out by his children, a victim to the
pitiless elements, and, more bitter still, the sense of undeserved
injury from those whose duty it was to foster and shelter him. The
children of Saul, and his son-in-law David, surround him with
protestations of duty and a heartfelt wish to soothe him by their
affection and care; but he is struck by God; prosperity has departed
from his house, victory from his banner; and his vacillating reason
discerns rebellion and dethronement in the very submissions of those
around him. He struggles with the sense of ill fortune, and the sad
consciousness of the occasional aberrations of his intellect; now
lamenting the days of his prosperous youth, now melted to tenderness by
the caresses of his children; and again, seized upon by suspicion, envy,
and pride, he wildly and madly casts from him every support and hope, to
find himself, in the end, alone, defeated, lost; till in a transport of
shame and despair, he ends a life so tarnished and abhorrent. "Saul" is
the best of Alfieri's tragedies; and, if we were called upon to point
out his best scene, we should select the second act of that play.

[Sidenote:1782.
Ætat.
33.]

Alfieri felt proud and happy when he had completed his fourteen
tragedies. "That month of October," he writes, "was memorable to me,
since I enjoyed a repose no less delicious than necessary, after so much
labour: full to the brim of vainglory, I breathed no word of my
achievements to any but myself, and, with a sort of veiled moderation,
to her I loved; who, through her affection for me, probably, seemed well
inclined to believe that I was capable of being a great man, and always
encouraged me to do all I could to become one." His works, also, were
becoming known. A few of the nobility of Rome formed themselves into a
company, and acted his "Antigone," in which he took the part of Creon:
the representation was crowned with success. He was, besides, in the
habit of reading his tragedies in society, partly for the sake of the
mute criticism displayed by the attention and interest they excited in
his audience; and, under the superintendence of his friend Gori, four
among his dramas were printed at Siena.

But this very celebrity was the cause of the disaster that hung over his
head, and, by drawing attention to him, engendered enmity and
disturbance. His familiar intercourse with the countess, and the daily
habit of his life, in forming a part of the society she gathered around
her, began to excite censure: this roused at once his fears and
indignation. His mode of life was in strict accordance with the notions
of propriety, as they rule manners in Italy. Injurious and to be
deprecated as the system of society is, no individual thinks, when he
follows the example of the whole of his countrymen, that he should be
selected as an object for blame. However, in a moral and religious view,
the so-named friendship of the countess and Alfieri was blameable, yet
they scrupulously attended to the rules of decorum, which form the whole
of an Italian's conscience, generally speaking, and believed that they
had every right to be happy in each other. As we have said in another
place, we are not inclined to bestow vehement blame on individual
conduct, resulting from a system of manners which has endured for ages,
while that system itself merits the utmost abhorrence, and, we are happy
to be able to say, is in progress of being extirpated in Italy: until it
is, there can be no hope of moral regeneration, or for the happiness and
improvement of its inhabitants.

However, it must be remembered that though, especially in those days, no
one would have been so unreasonable or barbarous as to prevent a lady
from having a cavaliere servente, yet the peculiar cavaliere she selects
is usually forbidden; and as much misery is often produced by an
interference in the lady's choice as by a total prohibition to be
allowed a friend at all. In the present instance, the husband of the
countess complained to his brother, the priests of the holy city were
roused to a perception of the scandal, and the pope induced to consider
it right to interfere. Alfieri found only one mode of mitigating the
violence of the menaced storm, which was to meet it: he voluntarily
quitted Rome, and, to prevent any actual measures of prohibition and
banishment, went into voluntary exile.

Affections and habits which had subsisted so long could not be thus
rudely torn up without intense suffering. After several years of
happiness, Alfieri found himself cast from the shelter he had selected,
wherein to place his warm and sensitive heart, upon solitude,
uncertainty, and bitter regret. Poetry and composition became
distasteful to him; he could not even enjoy his friend Gori's society,
whom he visited immediately upon quitting Rome: he was ashamed to annoy
him by his melancholy, and his restlessness and desire for travel
returned. He visited Venice, and wandered for some time in Lombardy, and
then again returned to Siena, to attend to the printing of six other
tragedies, although he had become indifferent even to the lately
engrossing desire of fame; and then he suddenly resolved to visit
England, for the sole purpose of buying horses.
[Sidenote: 1783.
Ætat.
34.]
He had long put himself on short allowance with regard to these
favourite animals; but, having saved a large sum of ready money, during
several years, at first of parsimony, and then of economy, he determined
to spend it on the purchase and maintenance of a number of English
horses of the best breed. A journey thus undertaken, with but one
object, was executed with a mixture of impetuosity and persevering
patience characteristic of Alfieri. He went to England; he bought his
horses, fourteen in number, to equal that of his tragedies; he
transported them safely across the straits of Dover, conducted them with
unwearied care through France, and led them across Mont Cenis with a
success--they being injured neither in wind or limb--on which he for the
moment prided himself scarcely less than on his dramatic labours.

On his return to Italy, he remained a few weeks at Turin; and the king
showed a disposition to employ him under government. His minister
sounded the count: but he refused to entertain any proposition on the
subject; for, although he acknowledges that the sovereigns of the house
of Savoy were not tyrannically inclined, but showed every inclination to
benefit their subjects, his uncompromising, and even fierce, spirit of
independence spurned every shackle, and he felt to breathe more freely
when he had quitted the territories of Piedmont. The countess of Albany
was now on her way to Baden for the summer. She passed northwards along
the shores of the Adriatic, while Alfieri proceeded south, by Modena and
Pistoia, to Siena. He had resisted the temptation of crossing the narrow
portion of Italy between them, and obtaining a brief interview; but when
she had arrived at Baden, and he at Siena, this fortitude gave way, and
he suddenly left his horses, and his friend Gori, and posted with all
haste to Alsatia, there for three months to enjoy her society.

During the two years of absence which he had endured. Alfieri had
forgotten poetry, study, glory, and his tragedies. But the countess's
presence awoke every dormant energy, and scarcely had he arrived, before
he conceived and wrote "Agis," "Sofonisba" and "Mirra." The last
deserves to be particularly mentioned as one of the best of his dramas,
particularly as he overcomes difficulties of the most appalling
description. "I had never thought," he says, "either of Myrrha or Biblis
as subjects for the drama. But, in reading Ovid's "Metamorphoses," I hit
upon the affecting and divinely eloquent speech of Myrrha to her nurse,
which caused me to burst into tears, and, like a flash of lightning,
awoke in me the idea of a tragedy. It appeared to me that a most
original and pathetic piece might be written, if the author could
contrive that the spectator should discover by degrees the horrible
struggles of the burning but pure heart of the more miserable than
guilty Myrrha, without her betraying the half, nor scarcely owning to
herself so criminal a passion. My idea was, that she should do in my
tragedy what Ovid describes her as relating, but do it in silence."

There is something touchingly beautiful in the first description of
Myrrha, in a scene between her mother and her nurse. She is described as
so gentle, docile, soft, and pliable of nature--so fearful of doing
wrong--so sweetly earnest to please her parents--and now to be labouring
under a melancholy so dark and gloomy, as to deface her beauty, and bow
her in appearance to the grave. As the action is developed, the notion
that she is under a supernatural curse adds to the awe and pity of the
reader; but, at last, it must be confessed, her violence and frenzy pass
the bounds of modest nature, and the passion she nurtures fails in
exciting our sympathy. This is the fault of the subject; inequality of
age adding to the unnatural incest. To shed any interest over such an
attachment, the dramatist ought to adorn the father with such youthful
attributes as would be by no means contrary to probability: but then a
worse evil would ensue; and the more possible such criminal passion
becomes, the more violently does the mind revolt from dwelling on it.

While at Baden, Alfieri received the afflicting intelligence of the
unexpected death of his friend Gori. This misfortune disturbed his
enjoyment of the last days of his visit, which of themselves were sad,
from the approximation of so painful and bitter a separation. With
reluctance and grief he left the countess and returned to Siena; but his
sorrow was too acute to admit of a prolonged stay in a town where he had
enjoyed the company of a friend lost for ever. He removed to Pisa; while
the countess took up her abode at Bologna. The Apennines only divided
them, but he dared not cross them. The gossip of the small Italian towns
is unconceivably eager and pertinacious; and it was necessary for her
future liberty to guard their conduct from all remark. Early in the
following spring, the countess departed for Paris, resolving to fix
herself in France, where she had friends, relations, and resources. In
the month of August she again visited Baden, and Alfieri joined her.
Again his mind was vivified and warmed by happiness, and again two
tragedies were the result of the inspiration. The subjects were the
Brutus of the monarchy of Rome and the Brutus who died at Philippi. In
the first he displays great force and energy; but the second, we must be
permitted to say, is a complete failure. To make a perfect equality of
sacrifice between the two heroes, as Lucius Junius Brutus caused his
sons to be decapitated, so he makes his descendant, Marcus, assassinate
his parent. The idea that Cæsar was the father of Brutus is so totally
devoid of foundation, and so little in consonance with the simple
majesty of the character of the patriot, that it deteriorates from the
interest of the drama, and, instead of exalting him, the discovery, the
resolution he declares nevertheless to persist in the assassination, the
sympathy and admiration he gains, is all so feeble, so puerile, and so
false, that it is astonishing that Alfieri did not detect his mistake.
To us, who possess the most admirable portrait ever drawn of magnanimous
and single-minded virtue in Shakspeare's delineation of the character of
Brutus, this failure becomes more glaring, and gives further proof of
the Italian poet's error in not studying the pages of the greatest
writer the world ever produced.

After some months spent at Colmar, the countess returned to Paris; while
Alfieri remained at the former place, writing letters and sonnets,
mourning over his separation, and correcting his tragedies. He passed
two or three years at this place, the countess joining him during the
summers. In that of 1787, he had a most dangerous illness. His friend,
the abbate Caluso, came from Turin to visit him; and but for this
illness, he had been perfectly happy. On the approach of winter that
year, he accompanied the countess back to Paris, and established himself
there. The death of her husband restored her to liberty; but a number of
circumstances led them to continue for some time in France. Whether they
were married now, is a secret that never has been revealed; but their
union was acknowledged, and it was understood that their constant,
inviolable attachment had received from time a sanction which prevented
any blame from being cast on it by their relations and friends. Alfieri
mourned over the necessity that brought him back to his abjured
Gallicisms; but he was somewhat consoled, during a three years'
residence in Paris, by superintending and bringing out an edition of his
tragedies, on which he bestowed the last labours of correction with
regard to style, and brought the language as near to his standard of
perfection as he was capable of attaining.

The disagreeable and, to his sensitive temperament, irritating task of
correcting the press, seems to have exercised an injurious influence
over his temper and genius. According to his own account, it dried up
his brain, quenched the fire of youthful enthusiasm, and prevented his
ever again writing with equal vigour and felicity. After terminating the
correction of his tragedies, he fortunately betook himself to writing
the memoirs of his life, which are the groundwork from which the present
pages are taken. It is written unaffectedly, and with great frankness
and self-knowledge; the style is unstudied, and the egotism of feeling
which produced it imparts extreme interest to the details. After
bringing down the history of his life till the year 1790, when he was
forty-one years of age, he still felt an utter inability to any high
flight in literature, and he occupied himself in translating the
"Æneid" and the Comedies of Terence. He had long enthusiastically
admired the versification of Virgil, and tried to model his own upon it,
adapting it, at the same time, to dramatic dialogue. This circumstance
is curious, since no style can be so opposite; the mellifluous,
dignified, and graceful flow of the Latin poet being a contrast to the
rough and concise energy of the modern Italian. This observation
regards, however, only his tragedies; less praise must be bestowed on
his other productions in verse: his translation of the "Æneid" is
feeble in the extreme; his longer original poems are devoid of even
secondary merit; and his love sonnets are, to say all in a word, the
very antipodes of his immortal master, Petrarch. Alfieri is a great
tragedian: it is impossible to read his best dramas without being
carried away by the eloquence and passion of the dialogue, and deeply
interested by the situations of struggle or peril in which his
personages are placed. The rapidity of the action, and the earnestness
and life with which every scene is instinct, renders it impossible to
close the volume till the catastrophe ends all. Alfieri was also an
excellent prose writer: his treatise on "Princes and Literature" is full
of power; the style is correct, flowing, yet simple, and without
meretricious ornament. The pure spirit of independence burns like a holy
lamp throughout, and gives a charm to every sentiment and expression.
But never was line so distinctly drawn between the poetry of
circumstance, so to speak, and ideal poetry: In all the pages of Alfieri
there is not one imaginative image; and we feel this most in his lyrics,
since ideality is the soul of lyric poetry. He seems never to have been
conscious of this defect. He would readily have admitted that Dante and
Petrarch were superior to him in genius; but he seems unaware that they
possessed a quality of which not one glimmering ray is to be found in
the whole course of the flood of rhymes to the composition of which he
alludes frequently as being the overflowings of poetic inspiration. It
is possible that Alfieri might have been a great novelist, had he ever
turned his attention to that species of composition. Or had he continued
to invent, instead of drying his brain up with the irksome task of
correcting what he had already written, he might have bestowed on us
tragedies finer than any we have of his, or, at least, several equal to
the "Saul." But, with all his philosophy and self-examination, he did
not understand the texture and capabilities of his intellect.

To return to his life in Paris. The disquietude arising from the French
revolution added to the irritable state of Alfieri's mind. We all see
the visible universe through a medium formed by our individual
peculiarities; but it is curious to find the advocate of liberty lay
most stress on his fear lest the tumults of Paris should interrupt the
completion of Didot's edition of his works. Probably his intense
abhorrence of the French prevented his fostering rational hopes for the
ultimate advantages to be gained by the overthrow of the time-worn and
corrupt monarchy of France, at the same time that it prevented his ever
being blinded by any illusion as to the real character of the events
passing around him. He prides himself on never having seen or conversed
with any one of the revolutionary leaders, and on having always regarded
the rise of a lawless democracy as the stepping-stone to military
despotism. From the first, he was eager to get away from these scenes of
bloodshed and horror, and in the spring of 1791 accompanied the countess
of Albany to England. This country did not please her; and he, grown
querulous and subject to the gout, was quickly disgusted by the climate,
and annoyed by the peculiar habits of life of the English. A great
portion of his and the countess's fortune was in the French funds; and
the fall of the assignats made it advisable for them to live in the
country where they still bore a value. This circumstance induced them to
return to Paris; and, resolving to fix themselves there, they took a
house, furnished it, and Alfieri collected a voluminous library: but the
whirlwind that swept over unhappy France included them in its
devastations. They became alarmed by the increase of lawless violence;
and when, on the 10th of August, 1792, Louis XVI. was dragged from the
Tuilleries and imprisoned in the Temple, they determined to fly from a
city, where it appeared that no one of rank or wealth could remain in
safety. The impetuosity of the poet's character was of great advantage
on this occasion. With infinite difficulty passports were obtained for
the countess and himself; and they fixed on the 20th of August for their
departure. The impatience of Alfieri caused them to anticipate their
journey, and they set out on the 18th. With a good deal of difficulty
they passed the barrier of St. Denis, and hastened to a place of safety.
Two days after, on the 20th, the municipality of Paris sent to arrest
the countess: had she remained, she would have been thrown into prison,
and, in all probability, have fallen a victim during the massacres of
the 2d of September. Not finding her, their income arising from the
French funds was sequestrated, their furniture, horses, and books
confiscated, and though foreigners, they were both declared emigrants.
Alfieri chiefly lamented his library, and the edition of his works. Some
years after, a French general, then at Turin, with a good deal of
ostentation, offered to obtain the restoration of his books, a list of
which he sent him. Alfieri has left about 1600 volumes: the list
contained the names of 150 of the least valuable. He refused to avail
himself of what he ironically calls a "French restitution;" and surely,
if national contempt and hatred is ever pardonable, it was to be excused
in an Italian, who saw his country over-run by soi-disant liberators,
who displayed their friendly intentions by a thousand acts of plunder
and arrogance.

Burning with an unquenchable hatred for all things French, Alfieri
returned to Florence with the countess of Albany, in which city he
remained till his death. In the tranquillity of his position, his love
of study awoke with renewed force. But whether it was that his fiery
temperament burnt itself quickly out, or that the ardour of his studies,
joined to ill health and intemperate abstemiousness, exhausted him.
Alfieri appears to have grown prematurely old. The spirit of invention
was dead within him; and nothing can be more deplorable than that which
he mistook for such, under whose influence he wrote laughterless
comedies and toothless satires, the most dolorous and innoxious that can
be imagined. Still, though original invention was dead, industry,
perseverance, and fervour in the pursuit of learning were as warm as
ever in his heart. He brought to a conclusion his translations of
Terence, the "Æneid," and Sallust: the latter is an excellent specimen
of style; but his poetic translations are languid and unworthy. As to
the unlucky "Misogallo," in which he accumulates, in prose and verse,
the whole force of his detestation of the French, it remains a monument
of how little men know themselves, and the mistakes to which genius is
liable, when it exchanges the nobler pursuit of the good and beautiful,
to soil itself by the pettier passions of our nature.

While thus employed, a more genial pursuit occupied him for a short
period, which he calls waste of time, but which, by linking him in
agreeable intercourse with his fellow creatures, and wearing away the
rust produced by despondency and over-excited feelings, would have made
his latter years happier; but Alfieri, ever bent on fighting with
difficulties, and thwarting his natural tendencies, cast from him the
medicine offered to his diseased mind. Some friends of his, possessed of
histrionic talent, got up his tragedy of "Saul:" Alfieri filled the part
of the unfortunate king. Others of his plays were afterwards
represented, in which he also acted; but he always preferred the part of
Saul, which confirms our opinion, that it is, of all the characters he
has pourtrayed, the best fitted for the stage, and the nearest approach
to those unrivalled princes of the drama, the heroes of Shakspeare.

After some months had been occupied by these representations, Alfieri
gave them up, and devoted himself exclusively to study. He had many
plans for composition: the chief of these were what he called
tramelogedie, or tragic melodramas, only one of which, "Abel," he found
energy to write, and this is an entire failure. He entered on a new
field, to which his genius was not adapted--the mingling of human beings
and spirits, of the passions of the heart and the airy creations of our
fancy; a species of composition which is to be found in perfection in
Calderon, and which Goëthe, Byron, and Shelley have made familiar to us
in modern times, and, according to their various capacities, adorned
with the mystery, fire, and glowing imagery peculiar to each.--But of
this creative power, that peoples our world with beings not of it,
though in it,--Alfieri was wholly destitute. We have already remarked
how entirely his writings are wanting in the more ideal attributes of
imaginative poetry.

At the age of forty-six he applied himself with desperate ardour to the
study of the Greek language. Forty-six is no advanced age: how many men
are in their prime at that epoch! but it was not so with Alfieri; his
very memory failed him, but he persevered with his accustomed energy,
battling with difficulties as if they had been opponents, inspired with
a sense of opposition. Thus he read the most difficult authors, with the
notes of the scholiasts, learning an infinite multitude of verses by
heart, and acquiring, in the end, by dint of unwearied industry, a
considerable knowledge of the language.

His health was infirm and his quiet disturbed by the progress of the
French armies. They came, they said, to liberate Italy, and, under this
pretence, destroyed its native governments, introduced their own crude
institutions, and then, on pretence of the opposition their tyranny met,
despoiling the Italians of their works of art, endeavouring even to
supplant their divine language, and treating with contempt and insolence
their peculiar manners and customs; so that any welcome given by the
Italians to these pretended friends only showed more plainly their
insulting pretensions and rapacity. When the French first appeared in
Florence, Alfieri and the countess hurried away as if it had been
visited by the plague. They established themselves at a villa in the
environs, having removed all their property from their house in the
city; and here they remained till the French were temporarily driven
from Tuscany. On their second invasion, Alfieri had no time to retreat,
and he satisfied his feelings of scorn and hatred by never speaking to a
Frenchman, or admitting the visits of the leaders of its armies.

His melancholy increased with the irritation caused by political events,
by unwearied study, and the physical weakness produced by his systematic
abstinence. He was happy in the society of the countess of Albany, and
that of his dear friend, the abbate Caluso: but many long hours he spent
by himself in gloomy reverie. The bitterness and asperity of his mind
was thus increased, and his dislike of society prevented the beneficial
action of sympathy and mutual forbearance. He considered himself, to a
great degree, a disappointed man in his literary career, and was
ignorant of the universal applause bestowed upon his tragedies. He
divided his time with the most scrupulous exactitude, and his horses
were still dear to him. Many hours were spent in the aisles of Santa
Croce, or other churches of Florence, listening to the music, and
absorbed in reverie.

During the last years of his life, he was visited each spring by a fit
of the gout, and each summer by a desire to employ himself upon original
composition, to which he devoted himself with an ardour which brought
on, each autumn, a dangerous illness. His six unlucky comedies were the
principal objects of these ill-fated labours; and his life was at last
their sacrifice. A theorist in all things, he imagined that, as the gout
proceeded from inflammation, it could be starved out of his frame; and
he commenced a system of abstinence that deprived him of the nutriment
necessary to support life. The countess in vain implored him not to
adhere to so senseless a plan: it has often happened that, by resisting
the prescriptions of physicians, and the aid of medicine, a man has
conquered inherent disease, and lived to an old age; but as soon as he
begins to administer remedies to himself, and to act from theories,
instead of from that long and arduous practice necessary to give the
smallest insight into the delicate structure of our physical nature, he
must become the victim: thus it was with Alfieri; hard study and
abstinence reduced his life to a mere flickering spark; he became a
skeleton in appearance; each day he took less nourishment, and the
weaker he grew, the more resolutely did he apply himself to study, as
the sole solace of his worn-out and burthensome existence. In the month
of October, 1803, he was attacked by gout in the stomach. The physicians
wished, by means of blisters and sinapisms, to draw it to the
extremities; but a childish dislike to the inconvenience which would
ensue, and the impossibility of taking his daily walk, if these remedies
were applied to his legs, caused him to refuse them. Opium was given
instead, and his pain was moderated; but still he sat up; and his mind
was rather excited than calmed by the narcotics administered: he
remembered as in dreams, but with the utmost vividness, various
incidents of his past life, or passages from his own writings and those
of others; and these he repeated to the countess, who sat by him
watching. No idea of approaching death seems to have entered his mind;
and the priest, who came to offer the usual offices of the catholic
religion to the dying, was sent away with an invitation to return on the
morrow; whether because he believed that by that time he should be
beyond such interference, or as a mere excuse for delay, cannot be told.
As he grew weaker, he sent for the countess, and when she came he
stretched out his hand, saying "Stringetemi la mano, cara amica; mi
sento morire." "Press my hand, dear friend; I am dying." These were his
last words. He died on the 8th of October, 1803, at the age of
fifty-five.

He was buried in Santa Croce, and the countess of Albany erected a tomb
to his memory, sculptured by Canova. It is not one of his happiest
efforts; but the inscription, which has been called pretending, appears
to me simple and affectionate. "Louisa de Stolberg, countess of Albany,
to Vittorio Alfieri," is surely no impertinent obtrusion of the name of
his dearest friend; and it may be remarked, that, while the countess has
been censured for recording her name so prominently. Alfieri, in the
epitaph he himself composed for her, makes it her chief praise that she
was "quam unice dilexit,"--the only love of the poet.

This account of the life of a man who was endowed with the chief
attribute of genius,--that of spontaneously forming and manifesting
itself, despite every obstacle or adverse circumstance,--may be
concluded by the quotation of the sonnet in which he describes his own
person; a faithful translation of which, which we also append, appeared,
some years ago, in "The Liberal." It may be quoted with the more
propriety at the end of his life, since it was written when time had
robbed him of the graces of youth; giving instead those characteristic
marks stamped by the action of his disposition and pursuits.


"Sublime specchio di veraci detti
Mostrami in corpo e in anima qual sono.
Capelli or radi in fronte, e rossi pretti;
Lunga statura e capo a terra prono;
Sottil persona su due stinchi schietti;
Bianca pelle, occhi azzurri, aspetto buono,
Giusto naso, bel labbro, e denti eletti,
Pallido in volto più che un re sul trono.

"Or duro, acerbo, ora pieghevol mite.
Irato sempre e non maligno mai,
La mente e il cor meco in perpetua lite,
Per lo più mesto, e tal or lieto assai,
Or stimandomi Achille, ed or Tersite;
Uom, se' tu grande o vii? Muori, e il saprai."[51]


[Footnote 51: "Thou lofty mirror, Truth, let me be shown
Such as I am, in body and in mind.
Hair plainly red, retreating now behind;
A stature tall, a stooping head and prone;
A meagre body on two stilts of bone;
Fair skin, blue eyes, good look, nose well design'd;
A handsome mouth, teeth that are rare to find,
And pale in face, more than a king on throne.

"Now harsh and crabbed, mild and pleasant soon;
Always irascible, no malignant foe;
My head and heart and I never in tune;
Sad for the most part, then in such a flow
Of spirits, I feel now hero, now buffoon;
Man, art thou great or vile?--die, and thou 'It know."]




MONTI

1754-1828.


Monti is, without question, the greatest Italian poet that has appeared
since the golden days of its poetry: he alone emulates his predecessors
in the higher flights of the imagination. It has been pronounced of
Dryden, that if each of the princes of poetry surpassed him in their
peculiar vein, yet his fire and originality give him a near place beside
them. Thus Monti has not the sublimity of Dante, nor the tenderness of
Petrarch; neither the inventive flow of Ariosto, nor Tasso's epic
conception and voluptuous grace: but he has a fervour, a power of
imagery, an overflowing and redundance of ideal thought, that mark the
genuine poet.

He came to revive the languid and unnatural style that flourished under
the reign of the Arcadians. Some few real poets had sprung up in Italy
in the interval between Ariosto and Monti: they are recorded in this
volume. Chiabrera and Filicaja are the chief. These men found in the
inspiration of their own minds the power that led them to adopt a style
of their own, and to bestow originality--which, in one shape or another,
is the vivifying soul of composition,--on their productions. Metastasio
carried clearness and grace of expression to a great perfection, but he
wanted strength and daring: Alfieri had not a trace of that sunshiny and
rainbow-like (so to speak) colour-giving power of fancy, without which
there is no real poetry. For the rest, the poets of those days were
Arcadians; the very word seems to express volumes of inane affectation,
and turgid, yet soulless, language. It is thus that a clever Italian
critic of the present day speaks of them:--"To the hyperboles and
conceits of the seicentisti, succeeded the follies and pastorals of the
Arcadians. The subject treated by these poets were restrained in narrow
limits; they were all futile, trite, vulgar, or silly,--adulatory, or
false. A new-married pair, a nun,--the new-born babe of some sovereign
or noble,--the election of a cardinal, or a bishop, or even of an
abbé--a funeral or a feigned love; such were the favourite themes of
the Arcadians. Was a marriage in question,--Hymen was adjured to bring
its chains to link two hearts; and a new Hercules or Achilles was
prognosticated as the future result of the union. If a girl shut herself
up in the cloister, the poets expatiated on her happiness; they
described the heavenly bridegroom as descending and stretching out his
hand to her, while the mischievous Cupid angrily threw away his golden
quiver; a censurable mixture of sacred and profane imagery was thus
introduced, and their ideas were steeped in two fountains, in
contradiction one to the other, the Bible and mythology. The most
shameless flattery blotted their pages, as they praised one another, and
depicted themselves on the heights of Parnassus,--beside the waters of
Hypocrene,--in the company of Apollo and the Muses; and the wonders of
Orpheus and Amphion were renewed, to express the charms of each other's
verses. No Arcadian dared imagine himself enamoured of a human being:
she was no mortal woman, but a goddess,--a Venus sprung on the instant
from the foam of the sea: lips, and eyes, and hair, had all their
appropriate, still-repeated epithets: did their lady sigh, or did one
word escape the paling of her ivory teeth,--tempests fled, the winds
were stilled, and Jove was again tempted to transform himself into a
bull for her sake."[52]

Men can do strange things when they associate in companies, and keep
each other in countenance by a wide-spread folly, that bars out the
wholesome fear of ridicule. Thus, the Arcadians had colonies all over
Italy. They gave feigned names to each other; they lauded, and
celebrated, and crowned each other. Good sense and good taste were
sacrificed in the emulation each felt to transcend his rivals in a
sonorous and turgid system of words, in which neither passion nor
thought appeared.[53] A new genius was wanted to trample on this
overgrowth of vanity or folly, and to gift the tamed and chained
language of Dante and Bojardo with wings and liberty. Such was the poet,
the incidents of whose life we now proceed to detail.

Vincenzo Monti was born in Romagna, on the 19th of February, 1754. His
father's simple, and even humble, but pretty and agreeable, house was
situated among the vineyards and agricultural country which lies between
Fusignano and the Alfonsine, in the Ravennese territory. The air is
healthy and serene, the country fertile and diversified, and the style
of life of his parents such as at once cultivated simplicity of taste
and kindness of heart. Nothing can be more primitive and patriarchal
than the mode of life of the smaller landholders in Italy; and to this
class Monti's father belonged. The farm-house--or villa, as it is
called, if a little better than a cottage--is situated amidst the ground
they cultivate. The name of _podere_ is given to these small farms,
enclosed by hedges, within whose limits grapes, corn, vegetables, and
fruits are all cultivated in a sort of picturesque confusion. The vines,
trained on trellises, form covered walks; and the sound of the
water-wheel is continually heard, and of the water trickling through the
conduits that lead it to the various parts of the grounds. The Italian
farmer works very hard, and the cottager still harder. He divides the
produce of the land with his landlord, entertains few servants, and his
habits are at once laborious and frugal. The parents of Monti were an
excellent specimen of the virtues of this unpretending race. They are
still remembered in the country by numbers of the poor whom they
assisted and comforted. Their children were brought up to consider it a
valuable privilege to bestow help upon those in want of the necessaries
of life, and Vincenzo in particular inherited from them a warm heart and
a tenderness of feeling that caused him to be idolised in his domestic
circle.

Monti passed his early boyhood in this rural retirement. To the end of
his life he remembered with fondness the days of his childhood, which
were spent gaily amidst a large family of three brothers, older than
himself, and five sisters. The reward for good behaviour among them was
a permission to distribute charity among the indigent,--a sacred,
soul-saving duty with catholics. The well-known benevolence of his
parents drew numbers to their house, where portions of food were
distributed to them. His mother never felt so happy as when thus
engaged; and it is related of her that, when, a few years after, the
family removed to Majano, where their charitable habits were at first
unknown, she complained in a sort of alarm that they were no longer
visited by the poor. The same biographer relates a story of Vincenzo. On
one occasion he was permitted to distribute the portions of food to
mendicants, who entered at one door and went out at the other: some
among them fancied that they could deceive the child, and returned
twice; and he, with ingenuous shame, turned away, and gave to them twice
without looking, that he might not be obliged to accuse them of their
trick. "An anecdote," continues his biographer, "perhaps scarcely worth
relating, only that it describes the character, or rather, it may be
said, the whole life of Monti, who, even in old age, frequently suffered
himself voluntarily to be imposed upon." Were a philosophical analysis
of Monti's disposition to be attempted, it might be discovered how this
sensitiveness to the shame of others, this sparing of their feelings in
preference to the assertion of truth and honesty, makes a part of the
same weakness that led him always to regard as a secondary consideration
moral truths and political integrity, when put in competition with the
happiness and welfare of his domestic circle. We call this sort of
sensibility weakness, because, though usually united to great private
rectitude of character, it is incompatible with the heroism of the
patriot and the martyr.

For several years Monti had no instructors except his kind parents; but,
soon after their removal to Majano, he was sent to the seminary of
Faenza, which enjoyed a good reputation for the solidity of its
instruction; there he learnt early and well the Latin language. His
first attempts in Latin verse were, however, so singularly infelicitous,
that his master thought it necessary to put him into a lower class than
that in which he had first been placed. The boy, roused to indignation,
made no complaints, but secretly learned by heart the whole of the
Æneid; and persevered so earnestly in conquering the difficulties, that
his Latin verses soon became distinguished for a style and harmony that
announced his poetic talent. His second trial was so different from the
first, that his masters began to regard him as a sort of prodigy; and he
himself entered with delight and ardour on the study of the Roman poets.
The full force of his impetuous and fertile imagination was early
awakened by them, and he began to exercise the art peculiar to his
country of extemporising verses; but his master had the judgment to
withdraw him from an exercise so pernicious to the strength and critical
delicacy of poetry, and induced him to write with care and meditation.
He was yet a boy when, under this tutelage, he composed a volume of
elegies, several of which have been printed.

It is the usual custom among the smaller landholders of Romagna to
destine their youngest sons to the agricultural labours of their farms;
and this was fixed as the career of Monti. He yielded to his father's
commands, but with reluctance. His mind was opened to the necessity of
cultivation, and mere manual labour and low-thoughted cares were
infinitely distasteful to him. His heart was with the Latin poets, from
whom he could not separate himself; and his dislike to every occupation
that was not intellectual grew to be insurmountable. His father thought
it necessary to reprove him; and a scene ensued similar to one recorded
as having taken place, several centuries before, between Petrarch and
his father. Vincenzo, moved by his parent's reproof to a belief that his
literary predilections were reprehensible, made a resolution to renounce
them. He led his father into his chamber, and there, before him, threw
his favourite authors into a large fire. The good man, touched by this
act of docility, gave him twelve sequins; and the youth, unable to
resist the temptation thus held out, hastened to the neighbouring fair
of Luga, and spent the whole sum in buying over again the authors whose
works he had left at home, still warm in the ashes of the fire into
which he had thrown them. His father, seeing the inutility of combating
with his inclinations, sent him to the university of Ferrara, wishing
him to enter on the legal or medical profession. But, after a few vain
attempts to apply himself to these studies, Monti gave up every other
pursuit, and dedicated himself wholly to the cultivation of literature
and poetry. He still continued to write in Latin, and always retained a
predilection for this language, and later in life translated some of his
own works into it. His first Italian poem was "The Prophecy of Jacob."
It was, of course, inexact in versification, and unequal; but when Jacob
prophesies the future glory of the Lion of Judah, the style rises into
vigour, and even sublimity. At this time the "Visions" of Varino and the
sonnets of Minzoni, two Ferrarese poets, fell into his hands. They rose
above the inanities of the Arcadians, and indicated to him the path he
should pursue. Through reading them he was brought to the perusal of
Dante, and his soul opened at once to the conception of all that Italian
poetry contains of grand and beautiful. Henceforth Alighieri was his
model and master, and he regarded at once with admiration and a sort of
worship the elevated and godlike powers of this most inspired of poets.
He wrote the "Vision of Ezekiel" in a sort of imitation of his
favourite, in which he displayed that grandeur of imagery and command of
language which distinguish his compositions.

Cardinal Borghese was at that time legate at Ferrara. Admiring the
youth's genius, he took him under his protection. On his return from his
legation, he obtained the elder Monti's consent to his son's
accompanying him to Rome. He was now eighteen. The first intimacy that
he formed in the capital was with Ennio Quirino Visconti, a man of vast
erudition; and under his direction Monti extended his classical
knowledge. It happened, while he was at Rome, that the Erme of Pericles
and Aspasia were discovered,--one in excavations made in the villa of
Cassius at Tivoli, the other at Cività Vecchia. Visconti wrote a
treatise on these marbles, and invited his friend to celebrate them in a
poem; and he wrote the "Prosopopea di Pericle," which is preserved in
the Vatican museum, written with great simplicity of style, and his
usual easy flow, yet fervour, of language. This was the first time that
he appeared in the character of a poet at Rome; and it was followed by
several other attempts. He thus attracted attention; but, having no
fixed situation, after remaining some years in the capital, he was on
the point of complying with his father's frequent requests that he would
return home, when a circumstance happened to change his plans. The
Arcadians of the Bosco Parrasio celebrated the Quinquenalli of Pius VI.
(1780, ætat. 26.); when Monti recited some of his compositions, which
attracted so much applause that the duke of Braschi, the pope's nephew,
sent for him the next day, and offered him the place of his secretary,
which was at once accepted. Monti remained at Rome in the house of the
prince, who treated him with all the kindness of friendship, and he
enjoyed full leisure to pursue his literary studies.

Yet it is, perhaps, matter of regret that Monti should have been thus
employed. It is very difficult to make rules for the education of
genius, when, on the one hand, care and want may fetter, and even crush,
its loftiest aspirations; or too much case and leisure wean it from
habits of industry, and foster the dissipation of thought and feeling
which too frequently accompanies the poetic temperament. Monti's muse
had surely not been silent if he had remained in his father's farm,
surrounded by the luxuriant beauty of nature, and supported by conscious
worth and independence. But no people need so much sympathy as poets.
The interchange of thought and feeling, the fresh spirit of inquiry and
invention, that springs from the collision or harmony of different
minds, are with them a necessity and a passion. And though solitude is
named the mother of all that is truly sublime, yet this solitude ought
not to be that of desolation, but retirement to meditate on the stores
heaped up in our intercourse with our fellow-creatures. Monti, among the
uncultivated peasantry of Romagna, might have found his glowing
enthusiasm grow cool from the absence of appreciation, and the want of
sympathy and equal intercourse.

Yet servitude at the court of Rome was no good moral school. To the
years he spent in the service of the pope's nephew, the habits of
dependence, and his daily intercourse with courtiers, may be attributed
that want of political integrity, and ready worship of ruling powers,
which was the great blot of Monti's character. The genuine glow of real
talent, the ambition natural to conscious genius, and the instinct of
one, in whom invention and the power of expression were indigenous, to
pour forth his ideas and sentiments, qualities which indefeasibly
belonged to him, would, in almost any situation, have made Monti a
writer. He might have been less refined in the farms of Romagna, but
more useful as a moral and dignified asserter of truth and independence.
Yet we must reflect that the germ of each man's character is born with
him, to be checked or fostered by education, but still there to colour
the tide of thought and influence the motives of conduct. And as
independence and strength of principle never displayed themselves as a
part of Monti's character, temptation might have found him as willing a
slave in the poverty of his farm as in the luxurious servitude of papal
Rome.

At Rome, at least, he continued to cultivate his poetic tastes. He
produced several poems which kept alive his fame. On occasion of the
marriage of his patron, the duke of Braschi, he wrote an ode entitled
"Beauty of the Universe;" and he celebrated the journey of Pius VI. to
the imperial court in a poem entitled the "Apostolic Pilgrim." But he
aspired to signalise himself by some greater work, and long meditated
writing a tragedy. As early as 1779 he writes to a friend,--"I am weary
of writing verses on frivolous subjects. A tragic drama is the notion
that most delights me. But how can I satisfy the craving I have to write
a tragedy, since I am not able to tranquillise my mind, and am occupied
by affairs which have no connection with poetry? An hundred times I have
begun, and as often broken off." And in another letter he expresses a
feeling which has often entered the mind of any one deeply interested in
carrying on some literary labour:--"I have a ravenous desire," he says,
"to write tragedies, which preys upon me. This is my madness; and I am
in despair, because I fear to die before I finish one."

His ambition was further excited by the emulation inspired by Alfieri.
This great tragedian was now residing at Rome; and Monti was present
when he read his "Virginia" in a society composed of the most celebrated
literati of the day. Monti listened with transport, and, burning with a
desire to rival this production, he instantly began his tragedy of
"Aristodemo," founded on a story he had read a few days before in
Pausanias. He was the more eager to accomplish his purpose, as lie
perceived the faults of Alfieri's style, and hoped to avoid them. The
fecundity of his imagination rendered it easy for him to rise above the
baldness and unideal versification of his rival; so that it has been
pronounced, that a perfect tragedy would be produced, were "the grandeur
and penetration of Alfieri adorned by the style of Monti." "Aristodemo"
was acted with the greatest success at Rome in 1787. Monti writes to a
friend,--"My tragedy was represented yesterday evening at the theatre of
Valle. I was not present; but when it was over, my house was inundated
by my acquaintances, who seemed mad with delight. I ought not to mention
this, but I write to a friend, and I assure you that every one agrees
that so great a success and so much enthusiasm was never known at Rome
before."

And here it is impossible not to remark the different feelings of
Alfieri and Monti. Alfieri entered upon his literary career when the
more brilliant portion of the fire of youth was passing away. He had
sufficient enthusiasm to animate him to mental labour, and to warm his
imagination to the conception of fictitious situations, but not enough
to foster the delusion of success. While he pretended stoicism and
disdain, he was very sensitive to criticism; but when applause was
afforded, he scanned the merits of his judges, was annoyed by the faults
of the actors, and never reaped the just reward of his toils--the sense
of triumph. While the more youthful Monti, early catching the spark of
enthusiasm from his audience and his friends, enjoyed, to its full
extent, the celebrity which a successful tragedy, more than any other
species of literary composition, is able to confer.

The genius of Monti, however, was not that of a tragedian: lyrical and
imaginative rhapsodies, rather than the concatenation of a plot and the
impersonation of human passion, were the native bent of his mind. The
story of "Aristodemo" is eminently simple in its construction; the
interest is entirely confined to the principal character, and there is
almost no action to support the piece. Aristodemo had, to acquire the
popular favour, and his election to the throne of Mycene, resolved to
sacrifice his daughter, when some angry god required that the blood of a
virgin should be shed on his altar. To save the girl, her lover declares
that she has yielded to him, and is about to be a mother. In his fury
the father destroys her, and afterwards discovers that she is innocent.
To add to his misfortunes he loses his only other child, a little girl
of three years old, in a skirmish with the Spartans. Henceforth he is
pursued by remorse; the spectacle of his murdered daughter for ever
haunts him, and horror and despair darken his soul. The tragedy opens,
fifteen years after these events, at the conclusion of a war with
Sparta, with the discussion for a treaty of peace, when the prisoners on
both sides are to be given up. Among those taken by Aristodemo is a
girl, to whom he has attached himself with paternal fondness, and who
devotes herself to mitigating his sufferings. She, of course, is
discovered to be his long lost daughter; but this is not made known to
him till the last scene, when the agonies of remorse, joined to sorrow
at losing his last consolation, have driven him to destroy himself. The
pure but warm attachment between him and his unknown child is delicately
and sweetly described, while his passionate and remorseful ravings,
though they rise to sublimity, shock us by going beyond ideal terrors
into images palpably disagreeable. From this sketch it may be seen how
deficient in action the piece is. Aristodemo comes before us to lament
and to rave. Still, despite his woe, he is a hero and a king; and, when
the interests of his country require it, he can dismiss his private
griefs, and assert the majesty of the crown. His character is conceived
in the truth and sublimity of tragic nature; and the interest that
hovers over him, the dim but harrowing horrors of his spectral visions,
the mingled remorse, terror, and love that tear his heart, and the
poetry in which these overpowering passions are expressed, take
absolutely from the languor which the want of action might otherwise
impart.

The success of "Aristodemo" induced Monti to write another drama.
"Galeotto Manfredi" is, however, a failure. It is founded on the passion
of jealousy. In his preface the poet mentions that it is wanting in
tragic dignity: such is not of necessity the fault of his subject, but
it decidedly is of his method of treating it, and there is no poetry to
redeem it from the charge of mediocrity.

He married, about this period, the daughter of the celebrated cavaliere
Giovanni Pickler, who had died a short time before. It is a singular
fact, that he made choice of his wife without having seen her, and not
on account of her extraordinary beauty, of which he was ignorant, but
from respect for the reputation of her father, and a wish to console his
afflicted family; while she accepted him on account of her admiration
for the author of "Aristodemo." And now we enter on a new epoch of
Monti's life, when he composed his most celebrated poem, and at the same
time gave to his productions that political groundwork which, from his
vacillation of principle, has not redounded to his honour.

The French revolution was at its height; and the time-worn and absolute
governments of every country of Europe were shaken, as by an earthquake,
by the mere echo of the Parisian tocsin. The French, drunk with
enthusiasm, were eager to call the whole world into a fraternity of
liberty and equality; and many were the warm young hearts, long bowed
down by the yoke of the continental systems of slavery, that beat
responsive to the call. One of the persons sent by the French to spread
their revolutionary tenets beyond the Alps was Hugh Basseville. He was
the son of a dyer at Abbeville; the talents he early displayed induced
his father to wish him to pursue a more dignified career, and he
educated him for the church, as the only profession then open to the
lowly born. But Basseville studied theology only to find doubts as to
his creed; he soon abandoned the clerical profession, and, going to
Paris, gave himself up entirely to literature. He here fell in with two
Americans, who engaged him as their companion, or tutor, in a journey
they made through Germany. At Berlin, Basseville became acquainted with
Mirabeau. Leaving his Americans he visited Holland, and wrote a work on
the Elements of Mythology, and a volume of amatory poems. When the
revolution began, he attached himself to the royal, or rather
constitutional, party, and instituted a journal which took that side. He
wrote also a "History of the French Revolution," dedicated to La
Fayette, with whom he was intimately acquainted; and the views he
developes are moderate and rational. He was naturally eloquent, and his
manners were agreeable, while he joined to these fascinating qualities
the more solid ones of industry, intelligence, and boldness, so that he
acquired the confidence and friendship of several of the Girondist
leaders. General Demourier named him secretary to the embassy at Naples;
and while there he visited Rome, for the purpose of secretly propagating
revolutionary doctrines. This imprudence cost him his life. On the night
of the 13th of January, 1793, he was assailed by the populace, and
received a stab, of which he died thirty-four hours after. In his last
moments, it is said that he was induced to regard his conduct, in
endeavouring to raise sedition against the pope, as criminal, and to
have exclaimed several times that he died the victim of folly.

Monti, who lived in the service of the pope's nephew, and was thus
attached to the papal court, and without that ardour for liberty which
is so natural to many hearts, and which appears at once senseless and
even wicked to those who do not feel independence of thought to be the
greatest of human blessings, of course looked on the French revolution
as a series of crimes, and saw no redeeming good in the madness that
urged a whole nation to so terrific a mixture of heroism and guilt. He
was acquainted with Basseville, and, hearing the recantations of his
dying moments, celebrated at once the repentance of his friend, and the
awful tragedy acted almost at the same moment (Louis XVI. was beheaded
on the 19th of January, 1793), in a poem entitled the "Basvilliana." In
this he feigns that the great enemy of mankind contended with the angel
of God for the soul of the murdered man. His death-bed remorse caused
the good spirit to remain triumphant; but as the crime-tainted soul
could not, according to the tenets of Catholicism, be received at once
into Paradise, the disembodied spirit of Basseville was condemned to
visit once more the banks of the Seine, and to view the horrors there
perpetrated, as the consequence of his guilty and impracticable
theories. The imagination of Monti developed itself in the happiest
manner in treating this theme; and the mingled emotions of horror and
grief that pervade the poem take a shape at once sublime and pathetic.
The soul of Basseville hovers over Paris at the moment that Louis XVI.
loses his head by the guillotine. The imagery with which he adorns the
scene is original and majestic. Four mighty shadows rush on the
scaffold, and hover over the dying monarch; shadows of former regicides,
who glory in the companionship of crime. Ravaillac, Ankerstrom, Damiens,
and one (the executioner of our Charles I.) who veils his face with his
hand, proudly assist in giving the fatal blow. Louis dies, and before
his beatified ghost Basseville prostrates himself; but his penance is
not got over, and he is forced to view other scenes of greater bloodshed
and more frightful violence; but as the poem enters upon these, it
breaks off abruptly, and is left unfinished.

The style of this poem does not resemble modern Italian poetry, but is
modelled on that of Dante; so faithfully modelled, that many
expressions, ideas, and even whole lines are, as it were, transfused,
into Monti's verses. It is a singular fact that no poet was ever a
greater plagiarist than the author of the "Basvilliana;" but the verses
of others, which he thus employs, are framed, as it were, so
magnificently by original ones, and are placed with such propriety, and
acknowledged with such frankness, that, as an English author observes,
"so far from accusing him of plagiarism, we are agreeably surprised by
the new aspect which he gives to beauties already familiar to every
reader." And thus transfusion expresses his imitations better than the
word borrowing: for though the form of expression is the same, a new
soul and a new sense--not better, certainly, but different from their
former one--are breathed into them. In some sort Dante and Monti
resembled each other in the cast of their ideas. They were both painters
of the mind's images. Dante was the more faithful, delicate, and
heartfelt; but there is a shadowy grandeur joined to a perfection of
taste and fire of sentiment in Monti, which renders his poetry highly
fascinating and beautiful.

The "Basvilliana" at once raised Monti's reputation higher than that of
any poet who had for centuries appeared in Italy; and he might have been
considered the laureate of royalty, but that his character was not
adorned by that sincere and exalted enthusiasm, without which no man
can, with any success, advocate any cause which embraces the interests
of human nature.

The tide of French republicanism, checked a little in its first
advances, now swelled by Bonaparte's victories, overflowed the Alps and
deluged Italy. The Austrians, defeated at Montenotte, Lodi, and Arcoli,
were driven from Lombardy: and the Italians hoped to exchange servitude
to a foreign power for national independence; forgetting that liberty,
when given, may also be withdrawn, and that it is only by force that any
real freedom can be acquired. While resistance was made to the French
arms, the requisitions of the victor, and the seizure of the finest
works of art, might have opened their eyes to the real views of their
_soi-disant_ deliverers. Napoleon himself had but one idea with
regard to liberty, which was a free scope to the exercise of his own
will. When that was given him, he could be generous, magnificent, and
useful; but when his measures were obstructed, no tyrant ever exceeded
him in the combinations of a despotism which at once crushed a nation,
and bore down with an iron hand every individual that composed it.
Bonaparte's ambition, however, could only be gratified in France, and
the conquest of Italy was but the stepping-stone to the French empire.
Still, when all the north of the peninsula was subjected to him, when
the pope had submitted to his terms, and the haughty queen of Naples had
been induced to enter into a treaty with her sister's destroyers, he
could no longer with any grace refuse the shows of freedom so often
promised. On the 3d of January, 1797, the Cisalpine republic was
erected.

Monti had been before invited to accept a professor's chair in the
university of Pavia, which he had refused. In the month of February
1797, general Marmont was sent to Rome on occasion of the treaty of
Tolentino, to carry letters from Bonaparte to the pope. Monti became
acquainted with him; being then in a bad state of health, and advised to
change the air of Rome for that of Tuscany, he accepted Marmont's
invitation, who offered him a seat in his carriage, and proceeded to
Florence. It may be imagined, that familiar intercourse with one of
Napoleon's generals was the foundation of Monti's admiration for the
French hero, and the cause of his opening his eyes to the good to be
derived from adhering to the new order of things in his native country.
At first he entertained the delusive hope that the blessing of liberty
had really been conferred on Italy by the French arms, and that his
countrymen would rise from chains and slavery to the enjoyment of
national independence under national institutions; and yet the
extravagant praise of Napoleon, which he indulges in, in all his poems
written at this time, does not bear the marks of a sincere patriotism.
Besides this, he had to struggle with many personal mortifications. The
"Basvilliana" was not forgotten. French exactions and French assumptions
had already alienated the minds of the noble born among the Italians.
They feared the conqueror, but disdained the masquerade of liberty in
which they were invited to play a part: thus the better classes shrunk
from forming a part of the new governments, and the offices devolved
upon men who had little to lose either in possessions or character. They
regarded Monti with envy and aversion, and, instead of receiving him as
a convert with open arms, his superior claims as a man of talent caused
them to persecute him as an interloper and almost as a spy. The heads of
the government, indeed, at first favoured him: he was invited to Milan,
and elected central secretary of foreign affairs; but he was soon
disturbed by persecutions. "My arrival," he writes several years
afterwards, "was hailed by the usual abuse of the republican journals,
who censured the directory for employing an enemy of the republic. I
loved liberty; but the object of my love was the freedom described in
the writings of Cicero and Plutarch: that which was adored on the altars
of Milan appeared to me a prostitute, and I refused to worship her.
Hence my excommunication,--hence the public burning of the
'Basvilliana.' On this I was obliged to prostrate myself before the
idol. I sang her virtues, and became a revolutionary poet: I grew insane
with the rest, and my conversion procured me patronage and grace."

It was not without a struggle that he stooped to these abject
submissions, and several events first intervened. The hatred of the
democrats, then the rulers of the Cisalpine republic, caused them to
pass a law which decreed that no one should be permitted to hold any
public employment who, since the year 1 of the French republic, had
published any books tending to throw odium on democracy. Monti's poem
was the principal object of this law; and one of his adversaries
exclaimed, "Let us get rid, not of the author of some foolish sonnet in
praise of kings, but of those who, with powerful enthusiasm and
Dantesque imagination, have inspired a hatred for democracy." This law
being passed, Monti lost his situation. He had published other poems
since the "Basvilliana;" but even these were not considered sufficiently
democratic.

The "Musogonia," or Birth of the Muses, is almost entirely mythological;
but, in the concluding verses, he apostrophises Bonaparte. He implores
him to be at once the Alexander and Numa of Italy: he beseeches him to
bestow laws upon her, and to unite her scattered members; and, with a
noble voice, he calls upon the Italians to cultivate concord and
unanimity. "Brothers!" he exclaims, "bear the voice of your brother!
What do you hope from divided opinions and counsels? Ah, let there be in
our country, in its danger, one mind, one courage, one soul, one life!"
The republicans perceived a hankering for royalty and tyranny in his
dislike of their measures.

The "Prometeo" is a finer poem, or rather fragment, for but few of the
cantos are written. The subject of it is the history of Prometheus; but
we have only a small portion of it in the poem as it stands. It opens
with the foolish act of Epimetus. Jupiter had sent to him a casket
containing the various intellectual attributes and moral qualities, to
be distributed among the new creation on earth. Epimetus begins by
bestowing various qualities on animals, and is so prodigal of his gifts,
that when he comes to man he finds the casket empty. On this, he has
recourse to his wiser brother Prometheus, who reprimands him for his
folly. This opening is the weaker part of the poem. Lyrical outbursts
were more accordant to Monti's genius. The appearance of Constancy
before Prometheus is sublime, and the hero's prophecy of the future
state of man is full of fire and grandeur. It ends, however, by a
prophecy of Napoleon, on whom is heaped every epithet that admiration or
adulation could suggest. Jupiter gives him his lightning, which loses
none of its terrors in the young hero's hands. He shakes the bolts over
Germany, and the Rhetian Alps resound with the hoofs of the Gallic
cavalry. One after the other, Prometheus celebrates the glorious
victories achieved in Italy, and hails with enthusiasm French Liberty,
as the mother of heroes who shiver the chains that bound Ausonia, and
wipe the tears from universal Europe--obstructed in its beneficent
career only by the English robber. Bonaparte must have exulted in the
bitter and venomous abuse that Monti never fails to heap upon England.
He tells us, in the preface to this poem, that its scope is to bring
into favour the neglected literature of Greece and Rome, and to merit
well from a free country by speaking in the accents of freedom. There is
something in the applause heaped on the conqueror that jars with our
notions of real independence and patriotism.

Monti, at this time, entertained the idea of returning to republicanised
Rome. But his friends dissuaded him; and his reputation, and probably
his adulation of the victor, caused him soon after to be named
commissary of the province of the Rubicon. But a poet makes a bad
politician; and Monti's integrity stood in the way of his success, and
he was obliged to give up his office. He made many enemies, and,
naturally timid and fearful for the welfare of his family, he was
terrified into making a complete _amende_ to the democrats of his
country by writing odes, whose violent sentiments went beyond those of
the most furious demagogues: and it is to these poems that he alludes
when he speaks of the worship he was forced to pay to the mockery of
liberty; and ever after he regretted his pusillanimity, and despised
himself for his concessions.

At the time they gained this point, his enemies were pacified; and the
survivorship of the professor's chair of belles lettres in Brera, then
occupied by Parini, was bestowed on him. But scarcely had he overcome
the enmity of the friends of liberty and equality, than their star was
eclipsed, and their reign came to an end.
[Sidenote: 1799.
Ætat.
45.]
During the absence of Bonaparte in Egypt, Suvaroff and the Austrians
crossed the Alps, and the French were driven from Italy. Her republics
vanished like a forgotten dream; and their partisans, Monti among them,
were forced to follow the retreating army of France, and to take refuge
beyond the Alps.

Monti fell into a state of deplorable destitution. He had left his wife
and young daughter in Italy, and he roamed alone and friendless among
the mountains of Savoy. His sufferings during the brief period of his
exile were frightful. He wandered about, subsisting on the fruit he
picked up under the trees. Often seated on the rugged banks of a
torrent, he satisfied his hunger with roots and nuts, and wept as he
thought of Italy and his ruined fortunes. The benevolence of his heart
manifested itself in the midst of this adversity. It is related of him,
that, as he was wandering one evening in a narrow lane, near Chamberi, a
stranger accosted him and asked charity, relating that he had a sick
mother and five children. Monti's heart was moved: two sequins was all
that he possessed in the world; he gave one of them to the suppliant.
His health failed through the hardships that he endured; the labour of
collecting his food became intolerable, and he forced himself to gather
at one time sufficient for two days, so as to secure himself one of
uninterrupted rest. His wife, who had remained to put their affairs in
some order, now joined him. She found him stretched on a wretched bed,
weak from inanition, but disdaining to apply to any one for relief in
his need. She brought money with her, and proper food soon restored his
strength; nor did he again fall into such an extremity of disaster,
though it was long before the fickle goddess smiled upon him.

The minister, Mareschalchi, invited him to Paris; and the new victories
of Bonaparte in Italy, on his return from Egypt in the following year,
revived his hopes of better times. Mareschalchi obtained that he should
be employed to write a hymn and an ode in celebration of the victory of
Marengo, which had driven the allies from Italy and restored it to the
French. He was to have been paid 1500 francs for these two poems, with
the further reward of the professorship of Italian literature in the
French university. But fortune was not weary of persecuting him; and
this remuneration was withheld, on its being represented to government
that he was, at heart, inimical to the French. Mareschalchi continued to
befriend him, and obtained 500 francs, or about 20_l_. "No small relief
to me," he writes, "in my necessitous circumstances." He was very eager
to return to Italy, and he writes to his brother,--"Of the many thousand
refugees who were here, almost all have returned to their country,
because all have instantly received the necessary succour from home. I
alone find myself abandoned by my relations, in a strange country,
without friends, and without resources; unless, indeed, I can make up my
mind to renounce my country for the sake of earning my bread in some
office. But an irresistible sentiment is linked to the name of my native
land. I possess in Italy the objects dearest to my heart--my child, my
mother, brothers, friends, studies, habits; all, in short, that renders
life dear. I pant, therefore, to return; and I implore you to send me
assistance in the shape of a remittance for my journey, and to discharge
my debts here. Every delay injures my interests, particularly at this
moment. Direct to 'Citizen Vincenzo Monti, Post-office, Paris.' I shall
count the days and moments--make my account short, if my happiness is
dear to you."

Soon after his wishes were fulfilled, and he celebrates his return to
his beloved Italy by a beautiful hymn, which begins--


"Bella Italia, amate sponde,
Pur vi torno a riveder,
Trema il petto, e si confonde
L' alma oppressa di piacer."


He does not forget the victor in this song of joy and triumph. Marengo
is mentioned with exultation; and Bonaparte celebrated with enthusiasm,
as liberating Italy from the barbarians, and again bestowing upon her
the blessings of freedom.

On his arrival at Milan, Monti employed himself in correcting his poem,
entitled the "Mascheroniana," which he had begun amidst the Alps, when
overwhelmed by misery, an exile, weeping over the disasters of his
country and his own wrongs. Lorenzo Mascheroni, a celebrated
mathematician as well as an elegant poet, was forced to quit Italy at
the same time as Monti, and died in France shortly after. In this poem
the poet vents all his spleen against his democratic enemies. In his
preface he exclaims, "Reader, if you really love your country, and are a
true Italian, read! but throw aside the book if, for your and our
misfortune, you are an insane demagogue, or a cunning trafficker in the
cause of liberty." The poem opens with the death of Mascheroni, and the
ascent of his soul to heaven. He here meets Parini, who laments the
unhappy condition of Italy. "When I saw her misery," he cries, "I
desired to die, and my wish was fulfilled. I first beheld her woe when
dressed in her new freedom, which was called liberty, but which, in
truth, was rapine. I then beheld her a slave, alas! a despised slave,
covered with wounds and blood, complaining to heaven that she was
betrayed by her own children--by the many foolish, base, and perverse
tyrants, not citizens; while the few remained mute or were destroyed.
Iniquitous law's were given her; discord waited on her, and pride, and
hate, and madness, ignorance and error; while the tears and sighs of the
people remained unheard. O, wretches! who spoke of virtue in
high-sounding words, and called themselves Brutus and Gracchus, while
they proved themselves traitors and monsters. But short-lived was their
joy. I saw the Russian and the Austrian swords destroy the hopes of the
fields of Italy, and the armed people commit crimes exceeding the supper
of Atreus and the vengeance of Theseus!" While Parini is thus pouring
out his angry and bitter denunciations, Mascheroni interrupts him.
"Peace, austere spirit!" he exclaims, "your country is again saved. A
deity has caught her by the hair, and drawn her from the abyss:
Bonaparte!" At this name, the frowning Parini raises his head, and a
smile illuminates his countenance. The victories of Egypt, of Marengo,
and Hohenlinden, are commemorated; and the "British felon" assailed with
the usual violence of hate. In the midst of the conversation of the
friends, God appears with his cherubim,--one the herald of peace and
pardon, the other of war and vengeance: they are sent out on the earth
to assist and wait on the Gallic hero. This poem, like so many others of
Monti, which celebrated what was then the present, and is therefore
truncated of its catastrophe, is a fragment. Such praise, dressed in all
the magnificence of poetry, must have sounded sweetly in Napoleon's ear.
The "Mascheroniana," whose chief object is to bestow on him new wreaths
of victory, is one of Monti's finest compositions. It is full of
strength, vehemence, and beauty. His imitation of Dante is even more
apparent than in the "Basvilliana." The machinery of the poem, and the
peculiar versification, are borrowed from the "Divina Commedia." But, as
we have before observed, Monti's was too original a mind to be a
plagiarist. What he took from another, he remoulded and brought forth in
a new form, in fresh and brilliant hues, all his own. He has not the
sublimity, the sweetness and pathos, nor the distinct yet delicate
painting, of his prototype; but no one can read his verses without
feeling that the true spirit of poetry breathes in every line, and that
the author pours out the overflowings of a genuine and rapt inspiration.

His third tragedy of "Caius Gracchus" had been written at Paris, and he
occupied himself in finishing and correcting it on his return to Milan.
This tragedy has been praised by some as superior to "Aristodemo," but
it is difficult to coincide in this opinion. It possesses fine passages
and some energy, but it is wanting in poetry; and the characters want
the simple heroism of antiquity, and resemble rather violent Italians of
modern days. The defects of monotonous dialogue and often repeated
situations flow also from an observation of the unities, which, by
confining the subject in narrow limits, permit no variety of action,
and, except in peculiar instances, force the poet to repeat himself;
making one scene frequently little else than a repetition of what had
gone before.

Monti had begun his literary and poetic life by servitude, when he
became secretary of the duke of Braschi. In his present desperate
circumstances he saw no hope, except in conciliating the ruling power of
the continent, and entering on the service of the man who looked on all
men as merely engines to fulfil his vast and illimitable projects.
[Sidenote: 1802.
Ætat.
48.]
Napoleon had by fresh victories driven the Austrians from Italy; and a
congress, called the Cisalpine, was held at Lyons, to fix on a form of
government for the north of the peninsula. This was a kind of mockery
that Bonaparte was fond of encouraging in the early days of his
elevation, since, under some of the forms of popular election, new
powers were, with a show of legality, bestowed on him. The Italians of
the congress fixed on a plan of government, at the head of which was to
be a president: they entreated Napoleon to accept this office, as the
disunited state of the country rendered ii unadvisable to elect an
Italian to it. Napoleon consented. This was a happy moment to bring
himself before the supreme power, and Monti seized on it. He wrote an
ode to Bonaparte, in the name of the Cisalpine congress; he chose the
motto from Virgil, and it was a happy one,--


"Victorque volentes
Per populos dat jura."


The verses are very beautiful, and worthy of a better cause than laying
the liberties of his country prostrate at the first consul's feet. Still
Monti was aware that, degraded by long servitude and disunited by petty
passions, the Italians were ignorant of the nature of true liberty. He
saw party spirit, oppression, and rapine as the result of any attempt on
the part of his countrymen to govern themselves; he knew also how vain
it was to contend with the conqueror, and he was very probably sincere
in his belief that the welfare of his country was safest in his hands.
Still, while we admire the harmony of the verses and the beauty of the
imagery, we repine at the slavish spirit that lurks within them.
Bonaparte, who loved to be borne up by the wings of men's imaginations
into a superior sphere of glory and success, must have been pleased by
the halo of poetry with which Monti stooped to adorn his name.

He did not go unrewarded. When peace was restored to Italy, the
institutions for public education became objects of interest to the
government; and a professorship was offered Monti; either at Milan or
Pavia, at his choice. Monti preferred the latter, for the sake of
enjoying the society of the able professors who filled the chairs of
that university. He was diligent and conscientious in his attendance to
the duties of his situation, and his lectures were fully attended: the
best of his prose writings being his inauguration lecture, which had for
its subject the praise of the literary men of Italy, and the claiming
for them the merit of many discoveries usually attributed to the natives
of other countries. After three years spent at Pavia, he was invited by
the governor to Milan, and a number of offices and honours were bestowed
on him. He was made assessor to the minister of the interior for the
department of literature and the fine arts; he was named court poet and
historiographer, and made cavalier of the iron crown, member of the
institute, and of the legion of honour. Monti was no laggard in
fulfilling the duties of the first of these places. He wrote a variety
of poems in praise of Napoleon, and in celebration of his victories. In
the "Bard," a fictitious personage, Ullino, attended by the maiden
Malvina, while watching with enthusiastic admiration the advance of the
French arms, falls in with a young wounded warrior; they, of course,
take him home, and watch over his recovery, when he relates, at their
request, the events of the expedition to Egypt and the battles that
illustrated Napoleon's return to Europe. There is the merit of
enthusiasm and glowing description in portions of this poem. The canto
on the expedition to Egypt contains the best passages.

[Sidenote: 1805.
Ætat.
51.]

When Napoleon was crowned king of Italy, Monti was commanded to
celebrate the event. He writes to Cesarotti,--"While you are robing the
magnificent spleen of Juvenal in beautiful and dignified Italian, I am
sounding the Pindaric harp for the emperor Napoleon. The government has
commanded me, and I must obey. I hope that love of my country will not
make my thoughts too free; and that I may respect the hero, without
betraying my duty as a citizen. I am in a path where the wishes of the
nation do not accord with its political necessities, and I fear to lose
myself. St. Apollo help me! and do you pray that I may be endowed with
sagacity and prudence." This poem, in which he tries to trim his sail so
nicely between patriotism and servitude, is called "Il Benificio;" or
The Benefaction, a vision. It has great merit. All that Monti ever wrote
is graced with such a happy flow, and with so much beauty of imagery and
expression, that it is impossible not to admire as we read. He describes
Italy as appearing to him in a vision; she is personified by a woman,
wounded and drooping, the victim of grief and slavery. The poet, struck
with compassion and horror, evokes the shades of mighty Romans from
their tombs to assist the degraded queen of the world; but they turn in
scorn from the fallen and lost one. Then a warrior, godlike and
majestic, descends from the Alps,--Victory attends him,--yet he
disregards her, and prefers the olive to the laurel (a most unfortunate
compliment to a man whose whole soul was war). He approaches the
unfortunate prostrate being,--raises her, and bids her reign; nor could
the livid glare cast by the British cannon over the Tyrrhene sea avail
against him. The warrior smiles, and at his smile all danger vanishes.
Then the austere and noble spirit of Dante arises and apostrophises
Italy, telling her that the regal power of Napoleon was exactly the
restraint and law he had wished her to fall under; and, taking the crown
from her head, places it on that of the French emperor. Spain salutes
the new diadem. The German, still crimson with his own blood,
acknowledges the victor, and bends his eyes to earth; while the British
pirate, powerful in fleets and fraud, curses aloud. "I send you a copy
of the Vision," Monti writes to a friend, "which I have written for the
coronation of our king: it has succeeded perfectly, and no work of mine,
since I began to write verses, has prospered so well." It is impossible
not to congratulate him on his success in attaining prudence. Assuredly
there was nothing too free in these verses; and Napoleon might accept
them without an unpleasant thought being awakened as to his usurpation,
tyranny, and rapacious, unbounded ambition.

Every fresh victory, every new conquest, was a theme for the venal muse
of Monti; venal we have a right to call it, since he acknowledges the
bond of a salary and the necessity of obedience. Thus, on occasion of
the battle of Jena, he brought out the "Spada di Federico;" or, the
Sword of Frederic,--the most popular of his odes of triumph. In this
poem he images the spectral hand of the warrior king of Prussia
disputing with Napoleon the possession of his sword, and yielding to the
proud assumptions and tenacious grasp of the Gallic victor. Ten editions
of this work were sold in the space of five months, and it was
translated into the French and Latin languages.

The attempted usurpation of the Spanish throne did not go uncelebrated.
The "Palingenesi" has for its subject the regeneration of mind and of
political institutions wrought in Spain, under the auspices of the
French emperor and his brother Joseph. If we could dismiss from our
minds the truth, and fancy, as Monti assumes, that a great and generous
nation had sunk into the depths of slavery and degradation through the
evil influence of a corrupt government, and that Napoleon was bent on
loosening its fetters and raising it to freedom and knowledge, it would
be impossible not to be filled with enthusiasm by the noble ideas and
grand imagery of this poem. But the taint of falsehood prevents any
sympathy, and our admiration of the imagination displayed is checked by
our contempt of the flatterer; while we smile at the bitter and violent
curses poured upon the English, whose motives for assisting the
Spaniards in resisting the French are painted in the most odious
colours.

We wonder as we read. There is fire, sublimity, and power in every line.
Can these be inspired, as we are assured by Monti's friends, by the mere
desire of acquiring the loaves and fishes, if not for himself
individually, for his wife and daughter? Are the shadowy forms which he
invests with so much beauty--the conceptions into which he infuses so
much energy and seeming sincerity--the mere playthings of his thought,
and not the genuine offspring of a mind teeming and overflowing with a
sense of usefulness and truth? We cannot believe it; we are so apt to
forget what our feelings were when the occasion that called them forth
has vanished like morning mist. When Napoleon fell, men forgot the
wonder and admiration with which they had regarded him during his
prosperity. He had come on the time-worn world like an incarnation of
the memories of antiquity. The greatest sovereigns, who traced their
descent from the middle ages--the thrones of the world, so long the
objects of worship and fear--the crowns and sceptres which had been
looked upon as the sacred and inviolable symbols of divine right--were
all at his feet, dispossest, transferred, and broken. It could be no
wonder that men looked upon the cause of these things as something
prodigious and superhuman. Monti may be excused that he joined in the
common feeling of awe and admiration; while, afterwards, seeing how
little good arose from the breaking up of the ancient tyrannies, and how
the indomitable will of one man was enforced by means of treachery and
slaughter, he might forget that he could ever have been so blinded, and
fancy that acknowledged fear was the cause of an inspiration which
really sprung from the slavish worship of success, which is too
naturally inherent in human beings.

Although Monti brought forward this disingenuous plea to excuse his
celebration of the hero of the age, he was sincere in one feeling,--an
attachment to the offspring of his brain, and in the indignation he felt
against those who depreciated his poetic merits. The "Sword of Frederic"
was attacked by the critics with great asperity, and he replied with
still greater acrimony. He had been charged with mannerism and sameness,
especially in the machinery of his poems, in which visions, spectres,
and cloudy spiritual essences play for ever a principal part. He would
not allow this to be a defect, and railed at the unimaginative minds who
conceived it to be such. He tries to be jocose in his indignation, but
his laugh is bitter; and he heaps the accusations of ill faith and envy,
as well as of ignorance and bad taste, on those who attack him. There
may be justice in this, but there is no dignity. There is always a
degree of degradation in noticing the enmity of a race of ephemera, and
not calmly relying on the award of the public.

Besides the poems above mentioned, Monti wrote several other poems in
praise of the conqueror. "The Jerogamia" and the "Api Panacridi" were
compositions which, whatever their apparent subject might be, turned,
after all, on the praise of the emperor. They maintained, if they did
not increase, the poet's fame. His best works were already written; and
these may be named to be the "Aristodemo," the "Basvilliana," passages
in the "Prometèo," the "Mascheroniana," and the "Palingenesi" and of his
shorter odes, that to Bonaparte, on occasion of the Cisalpine congress,
and his hymn on his return to Italy.

Years began to tame the fire of his imagination, and he felt the spirit
of original composition fail him. His active mind turned to other
subjects on which to exercise it: his love of classical learning led him
to works of criticism and erudition, and he wrote "Remarks on the Winged
Horse of Arsinoe." A want of knowledge of the Greek language must,
however, have been a great drawback to this species of study; but we
must regard with still greater wonder, considering this defect, his next
enterprise, which was the translation of the Iliad. He had been looking
out for a subject, and meditating in what way he could employ his
powers, when a word, spoken by chance by Ugo Foscolo, at once awoke in
his mind the desire and the energy requisite for so arduous a task. Not
being acquainted with Greek, he applied himself to every kind of literal
translation, and was, besides, mainly assisted by his friend Mustoxidi,
who explained passages, compared his version with the original, and
bestowed a degree of labour which, barren as it was of reputation to
himself, must be regarded as a singular proof of disinterested
attachment. Monti applied himself so vigorously to the task, that, in
spite of all his disadvantages, in less than two years he brought it to
a conclusion.

This new labour yielded him a large harvest of reputation. Other Italian
translations of the Iliad already existed: that of Salvini is valuable,
from his profound knowledge of the Greek and Italian languages. It is
elegantly and faithfully translated, but it wants spirit; and the
sublime Homeric fire, which renders the Iliad the greatest of human
works, glimmers feebly in his version. The translation of Ceruti is as
faithful as is compatible with his ignorance of Greek; but, besides the
want of the true spirit of the original, his style, modelled on that of
Metastasio and Rolli, wants vigour and versatility.

Monti possessed, beyond any other poet, the faculty of warming himself
with his subject, of penetrating himself with its soul, and imparting,
by the vivacity of his language and the glowing brightness of his
imagination, his own sentiments to the reader. The very act of
versifying seemed to be to him what the sound of song is to the
sensitive, in elevating and moving the soul. His mind possessed the
qualities of the harp, which gives forth sweet music when swept by the
breezes: thought with him was always pregnant with harmonious and
animated expression, with glowing and various imagery. On this has been
founded his excuse for writing with such apparent fervour on subjects
that did not really interest his feelings; and this facility is a good
quality in a translator. Monti could conceive and imbibe the spirit of
the original, and give it out, in his own language, with vigour and
life. Visconti, in waiting to the poet, says, "The choice and variety of
diction and phrases, the equal and sustained tone of the verses, and the
noble simplicity of the style, place your work among the few that
transmit the poetic name with honour to posterity." This praise was
accompanied by a few judicious criticisms which showed the care and zeal
with which he had examined the translation. Monti paid attention to
them, and endeavoured to amend all the errors pointed out in the
subsequent editions of his work.

[Sidenote: 1814.
Ætat.
60.]

When Napoleon was overthrown, and the north of Italy fell under the yoke
of the Austrians, Monti of course lost all his public employments, and
he was menaced in his old age by the miseries of hopeless poverty. But
his submissive disposition and plastic opinions were just of that sort
which kings delight to honour; and the emperor of Austria bestowed such
pensions on him as enabled him to pursue his studies in leisure and
competence. No doubt Monti felt glad, in common with all his countrymen,
to get rid of the antinational sway of the French, and hoped that a
better state of things would result from any change. His experience of
popular rule in Italy had disgusted him with it. He had not that zeal
and ardour of feeling resulting from a conviction that, however perilous
the passage from slavery to liberty, it must be attempted and persevered
in, with all its attendant evils, if men are to be brought back from
that cowardice, indolence, and selfishness which mark the slave, to the
heroism, patience, and intellectual activity which characterise the
freeman. Besides this, the armies of Austria admitted of no reply from
the unwarlike Italians. The remnants of their army which had returned,
wasted and broken, from the Russian campaign had been forced, after some
show of resistance, to capitulate: submission was their only resource,
and submission was in accordance with Monti's disposition. Nor did he
afterwards ever give umbrage to the jealous and revengeful government
whose pay he received, when hopes of better times and of redemption
warmed the hearts of all the nobler Italians to attempt the destruction
of their tyrants. He was acquainted with many of the Austrian victims;
and when we find in his letters complaints of sorrows and misfortunes,
we must attribute these to the real sympathy he felt for these unhappy
martyrs: but, though he sympathised with the men, it is probable that he
disapproved of their attempts. He was hopeless, and a hopeless struggle
presented to him only the too real picture of aggravated oppression in
general, and frightful individual suffering; he did not feel that
boiling of the heart, that fire of the spirit, which makes the great and
good risk all, rather than live subject to a power which exerted all its
leaden strength to press down genius, crush every exertion of mind, and
to reduce men as nearly as possible to the condition of the herds who
graze in the fields, without a thought beyond the food and rest which
the fertility of the soil and the beauty of the climate afford. Monti
was not one of these: his mind was active, and, in his way, he wished to
benefit his country. So when a thousand hearts were convulsed by the
throes arising from all the hopes and fears of a just rebellion, he
turned his attention to the study of the Italian language, to the task
of freeing it from the shackles which critics had thrown over it, and of
gifting it with the new spirit and animation which must arise from the
introduction of living forms of speech, instead of the classic and
restricted limitations imposed by the Della Crusca society.

He composed few poems after the fall of Napoleon. When the emperor of
Austria sent the archduke John to receive the oath of fealty from the
provinces of Lombardy, he wrote, by command, a cantata, entitled
"Mistico Omaggio," or the Mystic Homage, which was brought out at the
principal theatre at Milan. When the emperor himself visited Italy he
celebrated the event by a poem, called "The Return of Astrea," and
another, named "The Invitation to Pallas." His style in these later
compositions joins harmony to dignity, and forms that mixture of
strength and sweetness which is so delightful in Metastasio. His last
poetic compositions were written at Pesaro, where he was debarred from
his usual occupations, and dispirited by a disease that attacked one of
his eyes; and he solaced himself by dictating various poems full of
grace and beauty, which he afterwards published under the title of
"Sollievo nella Malinconia," or "Relief of Melancholy."

[Sidenote: 1812.]

One of the most fortunate incidents of his life was the marriage of his
daughter to a man of singular merit. Costanza Monti was (is, we should
rather say) remarkable for her beauty and her talents; her poetry,
though there is little of it, is of a very high grade, and one poem, "On
a Rose," has sufficed to establish her fame in Italy. Count Giulio
Perticari sprung from a noble family of Romagna. His residence was at
Pesaro, and he there filled successively the offices of podestà and
judge. He devoted himself to literature, and had published works both in
prose and verse, by which he acquired considerable reputation. It must
be in the memory of all Italians, and all those strangers who visited
Italy during his lifetime, how he was beloved by every one who knew him.
No man was ever more popular, more universally pronounced the best of
men; and this praise resulted from the goodness and singleness of his
heart, the sweetness of his disposition, and his unpretending but
attractive manners. Writing concerning this marriage to his friends,
Monti speaks of it with pride and pleasure. He says, "Count Giulio
Perticari, of Pesaro, is a young man well cultivated in literature. I
say nothing of his moral qualities, which render him dear to all. It is
the most delightful match that paternal love can desire."

After this period Monti's labours were chiefly confined to prose, and he
is considered in this manner to have greatly benefited the literature of
his country. The chief among these are the considerations on the
difficulty of well translating the poetry of the Iliad, and several
dialogues on the Italian language, full of acute criticism and wit. A
circumstance turned his attention still more entirely to the subject of
language. The government of Lombardy, wishing to show some encouragement
to literature, had ordered the Royal Institute of Milan to occupy itself
in the reform of the national dictionary; and Monti was requested by his
colleagues to publish his observations on the subject. He obeyed with
alacrity. His son-in-law, count Perticari, had devoted much attention to
this subject, and he became Monti's associate in the task.

The great question in Italy is, whether the pure and classical language,
the only one not wholly barbarous and vulgar, is Italian or Tuscan; a
mixture drawn from the various dialects of the peninsula, or solely
founded on Petrarch, Dante, and Boccaccio, and other early Tuscan
authors. The academy Della Crusca espoused the latter side of the
question, and, forming a dictionary, expunged every word not to be found
in the authors named the Trecentisti. Monti, on the contrary, attacked
the _ipse-dixits_ of this academy, and, pointing out innumerable errors
in their dictionary, undertook, as he called it, a crusade against the
Della Crusca.

This is a question that has divided all the talents of Italy, and in
which it appears presumptuous in a foreigner to express any decision.
Still we may reason from general grounds, and from analogy. Every
portion of Italy has a distinct dialect. Immediately on leaving the
precincts of any town, an acute ear will detect in the person who lives
outside the gate a difference in the form of speech and pronunciation.
Many of the towns use a mere _patois_, which has never been written. The
Neapolitan, Romagnole, Genoese, and Milanese, each have a dialect,
devoid of grace, cacophonous, truncated of vowels, and unintelligible to
any but themselves; the Venetian being the only one distinguished for
its own peculiar charms. To a stranger the language of the Romans has a
great charm: the _bocca Romana_, or Roman pronunciation, is clear, soft,
and yet emphatic. Their language is unidiomatic, and therefore easily
comprehended. You enter Tuscany, and come upon those terse and idiomatic
forms of speech which enraptured Alfieri, and which give so much energy
and animation to the expression of sentiment, so much clearness and
precision to narration or reasoning. But even these are not admitted by
the Della Crusca. The Florentine is still a dialect--the Pisan and the
Siennese fall under the same denomination: the principal difference is
that the grammar of all the Tuscans is pure, and that you may form your
speech on that of the peasantry and servants, without running any risk
of falling into errors and vulgarisms. Alfieri used to mingle in the
crowds assembled in the market-place of Sienna, there to imbibe from
unlearned lips the purest modes of the Italian language. The dictionary
Della Crusca was founded therefore on Tuscan, omitting its
peculiarities, and carefully registering any innovations that had crept
in since the era of the Trecentisti. It is obvious, under this tutelage,
that the Italian became, when written, virtually a dead language. No
author could adopt the forms of speech he made use of in the common
conversation. The language that they heard and spoke when moved by joy,
by grief, by love, or anger, was to be modified, corrected, and, so to
speak, translated, before it could be put in a book. The living impress
of the soul was to be taken from it, and, instead of putting down the
word that rose spontaneously to the lips, and ought to have flowed as
easily from the pen, the author hunted in the Della Crusca dictionary
for authorities, which shackled the free spirit of inspired genius with
chains and bolts forged from the works of the old writers, who
themselves wrote as they spoke, and created a language, simply by
putting down the forcible and graceful expressions then in colloquial
use.

Still a great difficulty arises from any deviation from these rules. Was
then the Florentine dialect, or the Siennese, or the Pisan, to be the
written language of the country? Each city would have rejected its
neighbour's, and still more would Lombardisms be regarded with disdain
by the inhabitants of the south. Language, pronunciation, idiom, all
form a habit to the eye and ear, which, beginning with our very birth,
cannot be afterwards discarded. No Tuscan ever would or even could
tolerate the introduction of any of the words or phrases belonging to
other dialects; and they endure the mistakes of foreigners with less
disgust than the uncouth pronunciation of their countrymen of the north
and east of the peninsula. Nor will they allow that even the well
educated among these use classic modes of speech. This is the point of
contention; for their antagonists insist, that they are in as full
possession as the Tuscans of pure Italian, drawing it from the same
sources— namely, the best writers of the country; and assert that they
are as well able to originate new modes of expression, and to turn with
as much elegance and force those already in use.

Monti and Perticari both entered heart and soul into this dispute, which
speedily roused every literary person in Italy to take one side or the
other. The Tuscans, headed by the Della Crusca, were furious that their
long-acknowledged supremacy should be questioned; while Monti, resting
the merits of his opinion on the great authority of Dante, did not
hesitate in his attack. Several letters to his friend Mustoxidi display
his earnestness and sincerity in the cause. We extract passages from
them, as explanatory of his ideas and characteristic of the man.

"The necessity of relaxing a little the intensity of the labour I have
in hand, led me for a few days among these mountains, where yours of the
2d found me. To fulfil my duty towards government, I have been obliged
to publish my remarks on the Della Crusca vocabulary, and the great
distinction of which it is necessary to remind the Italians; the
distinction I mean between the plebeian dialects, and that dignified
language spoken by all the well educated in the country, from the summit
of the Alps to the Lilybæum promontory. Founding my opinion on the
authority of Dante, in which both Petrarch and Boccaccio concur in a
surprising manner, I have undertaken to advocate that dignified Italian
which is not spoken but written; and to vindicate the rights of fourteen
provinces of Italy against the pretensions of a single one, which,
contrary to the principles of the great father of Italian literature,
has endeavoured to substitute the language in use in a single city, in
short a peculiar dialect, which, however beautiful, is only a dialect,
and can never fill the place of that universal language of which the
country has need. I do not know whether I shall treat this great cause
worthily; but I am convinced that whoever impugns the principles which I
establish, must begin by proving that Dante and the other two were mad.
I dare not believe that I have obtained a complete victory; but I have
laid the foundation-stones on which others of greater talent may one day
erect and finish the edifice."

To another friend he writes:--"The treatise of Perticari on the language
of the Trecentisti, which will soon be published, is a _chef-d'oeuvre_,
displaying great philosophy and acute criticism. I promise you that it
will make a great sensation, and that the Crusca with drooping head,
_caudamque remulcens_, will not know what to answer."

"Grassi has written an excellent parallel of the Della Crusca dictionary
with that of Johnson and the Spanish academy, which are similar in their
plan; and you will perceive the Gothic condition of our vocabulary in
comparison with others. Assistance and support reach me from all parts
of Italy, even from Tuscany; so that I may say that the whole nation
sides with me."

With more moderation he writes afterwards,--"We do not wish to rule; but
neither reason nor honour permit us to continue slaves. We only desire
the right to have a voice in the defence of national rights against
municipal pretensions: for the rest, we will take the law from them."

In fact, Monti must have felt the extreme difficulty of the question. In
England and France it is just to say, that the language of the well
educated all over the country may serve for authority as to language.
But the nobility and higher classes in Lombardy and Romagna all speak
their unintelligible dialects among themselves; it is only with
strangers, and when they write, that they have recourse to Italian. It
is impossible, therefore, that what they compose by rule, after study
and practice, can be the living language of a people in opposition to a
dialect, if you will, which, with few omissions and some change of
pronunciation, is the admiration of all who can appreciate the true
beauties of style; which is remarkable for passion and fervour combined
with concision and sweetness; for idiomatic phrases that realise and
stamp as it were the thought, instead of a periphrastic expression which
speaks of an idea or notion rather than giving expression to these
themselves. Monti was right in throwing aside the classical shackles of
the Della Crusca; but there is token in his letters that, in his heart,
he at last acknowledged that there was more of the living spirit of true
Italian abroad in the colloquial idiom of Tuscany, than in all the
well-turned sentences and set phrases of the well educated of the rest
of Italy.

We cannot help thinking that Monti must have been very happy during the
prosecution of these labours. An active mind abhors repose, when it must
"cream and mantle like a standing pool." The aid and sympathy of his
amiable and cultivated son-in-law must have shed an infinite charm over
his labours, the zeal of his partisans have flattered, the attacks of
his enemies have animated him. He believed that he was delivering his
country from a superstition which clogged the springs of her literature,
and choked up its free course. To a great degree he was in the right,
and the proof is in the original and beautiful use made of his theory by
the Italian authors of the present day.

Monti, loudly acknowledged to be the first Italian poet of his day,
continued to reside at Milan, devoted to literary pursuits, surrounded
by a circle of admirers, the chief not so much of a sect, as of Italian
literature. Yet he was often attacked, and was by no means tolerant of
criticism. His heart, however, was of better grain than his temper, and
his violent literary disputes with distinguished contemporaries, with
Mazza, Cesarotti, and Bettinelli, terminated in mutual friendship and
esteem. Angry when offended, and unmeasured in his expressions of
offence, yet the desire of reconciliation on the part of others was
always met by him with cordiality and ready forgiveness. He was the more
loved and admired the more he was known; one of the charms that attended
his intercourse was the beauty of his recitation. To hear him read
Virgil or Dante, was to find a deeper pathos in the laments of Dido, new
energy in the complaints of Ugolino. Fond of, devoted to his art, there
was no pedantry about him: he never thrust it upon the ignorant or
frivolous; but with his friends he loved to analyse the essence of
poetry, and to discuss the great question then in vogue in Italy of the
classic and romantic schools. There is a letter of his to a friend on
this subject, passages of which may be quoted as showing his opinions on
this subject, opinions which bear the stamp of truth.

"A poet," he writes, "ought to paint the nature which he beholds. I
applaud the poetry of the North, which is in perfect accord with the
gloomy atmosphere from which it receives its inspiration. But Italian
poetry, born of a glad and happy sky, is mad when she would robe herself
in clouds, and study to paint a nature of which she can form no idea
except from imagination. And besides, should poetry, whose chief use is
to delight (and, in the miserable state of human beings, to delight is
to serve), ought she to appear rough and frowning, ruled by pedantry and
crabbed philosophy? Is it possible that no one knows how to distinguish
the office of poet from that of philosopher? It is one thing to speak to
the senses, another to speak to the intellect. Naked and dry truth is
the death of poetry; for poetry and fiction are the same, and fable
being only truth disguised, this truth must be ornamented by flowers to
be gladly received. You scattered fresh and beautiful roses over your
poetic meditations when you speak of Greece and Rome; but, when you
leave these fields of perennial poetic beauty, and say that the thoughts
of the Greeks ran around in a narrow circle of images, and after
uttering this falsehood, you throw yourself with loosened reins into the
praise of the romantic school, then, my noble friend (pardon me if I
frankly declare my opinion), you are no longer the same. Had I been at
your side when you wrote your tender adieu to the gods of Greece, I
should have persuaded you not to continue it--nor to irritate the shade
of Schiller--of that Schiller whom, next to Shakspeare, I admire. Do you
not know that his best and favourite ode is entitled the 'Gods of
Greece?' in which he manifests his indignation against those who have
expelled them from the kingdom of the muses, and prays that they may be
recalled to adorn life and poetry. I conversed much with lord Byron
during the fifteen days' stay which he made at Milan. Do you know that
he trembled with rage when any one chanced, fancying that they paid him
a compliment, to praise the romantic school. Yet, in the sense in which
we understand it, no one was more romantic than he. But he disdained the
name, hating to find himself mixed up with the crowd of fools who
dishonour that noble school. I do not wish to play the preceptor with
you, but allow the true friendship that binds me to you to conclude with
a counsel which for many years I have myself followed, _inter utrumque
vola_; and, leaving the squabbles of party, let us use our best
endeavours to write good verses."

We may add to this profession of the poet's faith with regard to the
classic and romantic schools, that Monti considered Homer, Dante, and
Shakspeare as the first poets of the world; thus giving proof of the
justness of his taste, and demonstrating that originality and truth were
appreciated by him at their just value. Next to these three kings of the
art he placed Virgil, whom he loved as the friend of his boyhood. He
preferred Tacitus and Livy among the Latin prose writers, and
Machiavelli among the Italians. His opinions on these subjects were
delivered without arrogance, and without presuming to institute an
unappealable decision.

The count and countess Perticari resided principally at Pescara; but
they held frequent intercourse with Monti at Milan. In the winter of
1821-22, Perticari having made some stay at Milan, Monti accompanied
him on his return home. Several of his letters to his wife written
during this excursion are published; and we cannot resist the temptation
of giving them to the reader, affording as they do demonstrations of his
affectionate heart, and of the pleasure he took in the society of his
amiable relative. The first of these is dated from Verona, 7th October,
1821.

"I never made a merrier journey. We were six in company: a Brescian, a
Veronese, a Paduan, Mercandante, and us two. Day had scarcely dawned,
when we began to examine each other, and snuff-boxes went their amicable
round. An instant confidence sprung up among us, which led to much chat
and pleasantry. So gay were we, that we did nothing but laugh in chorus
till we arrived at the gates of Verona. Perticari and I ordered that our
luggage should be carried to the inn; being determined to remain free.
But the signore Mosconi, and Persica, had already left word at the best
inns that there was no room for Perticari and Monti; and, at the moment
when we arrived in the diligence, the countess Clarina and her daughter,
and the count, got into their carriage to meet and run away with us, as
if we had been two beautiful birds. Poor Mariano, who was accompanying
the porter with our luggage to the hotel, was pounced upon by the son of
the countess, ordered to turn right about and to follow him, he knew not
whither; not daring to resist, and fearing that his commander was a
custom-house officer. In short, it was not possible to resist the gentle
violence put upon us, and the cordial entreaties of my dear friend the
countess; and here we are welcomed, feasted, and honoured beyond
measure.

"It was our intention only to remain three days at Verona, but we have
been obliged to promise not to go till Sunday. The countess means to
accompany us half-way on the road to Vicenza, where we shall arrive by
noon, and on Monday evening we shall be at Bassano, three hours' journey
only from Vincenza; thence to Passagno, and on to Padua, whence you
shall hear from us."


"Venice, November 20. 1821.

"Not to leave you any longer waiting for news of us, I seize a moment
when every one is asleep (it being only five in the morning) to tell you
that yesterday we arrived safely at Venice. It would be a too
long-winded egotism to relate to you the kindness, the politeness, the
friendly contests, with which we have been every where welcomed. We had
been expected here for several days with impatience, and, at the moment
of our arrival, chance brought us into immediate contact with the baron
Tordero, who embraced us with indescribable delight. It being known that
we were going to call on the countess Albrizzi, an assembly gathered
together there; nor can I describe to you the demonstrations of joy with
which we were welcomed by that celebrated lady, and all her agreeable
friends. We remained till eleven, and should have staid longer had not
hunger (for we had not dined) recalled us to our inn; that, and the
circumstance that our friends, who had accompanied us from Padua, were
waiting for us. The merriment at table was prolonged till one in the
morning; so you see I have barely had three hours' sleep, and yet I
never was so well in my life."


"Pesaro, December 7. 1821.

"At length, yesterday, at the stroke of the ave-maria, we arrived, safe
and sound, at Pesaro, to the immense joy of our Constance; a joy,
nevertheless, mingled with bitterness, because her mother had not chosen
to accompany us: a circumstance which grieves me also, because I fear
that the severity of the winter, at Milan, which is here mild, may be
injurious to you. But, since you have been pleased to disappoint our
hopes, at least take particular care of your health, and do not expose
yourself to cold.

"Surrounded by visits and compliments, I have no time at present for
more. Let it suffice that my health is flourishing, and that I hope that
yours is the same. Constance and Giulio embrace you fondly. Addio,
addio!"


The following letter does not concern personal topics; but gives so
lively a picture of Italian manners, that it is well worthy to be
extracted:--


"Pesaro, January 12. 1822.

"You have reason to complain of the infrequency of my letters, but I
study and write continually; and when I am buried among my books, with a
pen in my hand, you know how difficult it is to draw me away, and ought
to forgive me.

"I am delighted to hear that, notwithstanding the clouds and snow that
infest Milan at this season, your health had not yet suffered. I entreat
you to take the greatest care of it. Mine is perfect. I never enjoyed so
benignant a winter. It is so mild, that I am dressed now as I am
accustomed to do at Milan in October.

"For the sake of making a longer letter, I will relate an anecdote which
will make you laugh.

"There is an ancient custom still existing at Fano, ten miles from
Pesaro, of celebrating a bull-fight at this season; to which a great
concourse of people resort from the surrounding towns. A few days ago
the first celebration took place. A truly ferocious bull was turned into
the arena. It is a law, that whoever chooses to attack the animal may
descend into the lists. No one dared expose himself to this infuriated
creature, and all the dogs who ventured to assail him were tossed and
killed. At length a peasant presented himself, and, to the wonder of
all, approached the tremendous animal. He boldly went close to him; and
the bull became quite mild, allowing himself to be patted and stroked,
while he licked the hand that caressed him; every one was astonished,
when, all of a sudden, a fellow among the spectators starts up, and
calls out, 'The man is a sorcerer!' 'A sorcerer! a magician!' exclaimed
several others in a fury. 'Burn the magician! burn the magician!' every
one exclaims. The president of the games is also persuaded that this
prodigy can only be the work of the devil; and he sends four soldiers,
who seize on the magician, drag him from the lists, and throw him into
prison. The poor fellow asked the cause of this violence; he was told,
'You are a magician; you will be hanged and burnt!' 'What are you saying
about a magician?' cried the man; 'does not his excellency and his
reverence know that the bull let me touch him because he knew me? I am
his master.' This testimony, being confirmed by several who knew the man
to be the master of the bull, and who took oaths to this effect, ought
to have cured the president of his folly; but the poor magician is still
in prison, and they are still disputing what to do with him."

At the same time that Monti writes thus to his wife, his letters to his
other friends are equally full of the pleasure he enjoyed at this time.
"You will like to know," he writes to one, "how I am passing my life.
Most happily; but not in idleness. Happily, because I am with my
children; and enjoy a season so mild and serene, that winter resembles
the opening of spring. Not in idleness, because I pursue my studies, and
mean to give a last, short, critical treatise."

But a few months after, in the July of the same year, 1822, Monti again
visited Pesaro, in circumstances that form a painful contrast with the
tranquil and domestic happiness that occasioned him so much pleasure
during his former one. Perticari had died, suddenly, and Monti went to
assist and console his sorrowing daughter. He thus writes, on this
occasion, to his friend Mustoxidi, in a letter dated Pesaro, 30th July,
1822:--

"You will have heard from my wife the pitiable state in which I found my
poor Constance. My arrival has produced a happy change in this
unfortunate creature: my coming was like a sunbeam on a flower beaten
down by the tempest. But, again, her mind is distracted, sleep flies
from her eyes, and her health suffers dreadfully. I must applaud the
kind attentions of her mother-in-law, who is an angel of goodness. But I
perceive that the only way to preserve her from the most dangerous
consequences of excessive grief, is to take her from a place too full of
shocking associations. And I would not delay my journey, but for the new
regulation of the pontifical police, which does not permit any one to
leave these states without a passport countersigned by the Austrian
ambassador at Rome. As soon as I obtain this I shall set out, and
conduct this dear object of my compassion to the arms of her mother."

This was a wound not easily healed, and never to be forgotten. In the
spring of the following year Monti still alludes to his loss with the
keenest grief. "Your letter," he writes to a friend, "afforded me
infinite pleasure and consolation. For a long time I have lived a
wretched life under the rod of adversity; and it is only when I enjoy
the society of some person dear to me, or hear from them, that I become
a little cheerful, and my spirits revive. Such has been the effect, dear
friend, of your letter to your poor Monti--poor indeed in every way, and
very unhappy. Unhappy in the death of Giulio; unhappy in the ill health
of Constance, who is wasting away with grief; unhappy in myself, as I am
deaf, old, and almost blind. For my eyes, owing to my over-use of them
in reading and writing by candle-light, are fallen into their old
state."

The last volume of the "Proposta" was published in July, 1823; and, this
last prosaic labour finished, the imagination of Monti awoke again, and
he turned his thoughts once more to the composition of poetry. He
restored the true reading to the "Convito" of Dante, which he prized as
the basis and authority of his own theories concerning the Italian
language. He wrote, also, the idyl on the nuptials of Cadmus; and then
contemplated the completion of his poem of the "Feroniade," which he had
begun many, many years ago at Rome. When he was secretary to don Luigi
Braschi, duke of Nemi, and nephew of Pius VI., he was accustomed to
accompany his patron in his hunting expeditions: the usual course of
these excursions was the Pontine marshes, near Terracina, a spot
abundant in game. There is a fountain in that neighbourhood, supposed to
be that anciently dedicated to the Diva Ferronia, at which the hunters
were accustomed to drink to refresh themselves. The sight of that
insalubrious marshy tract of land, the drainage of which had just been
undertaken by the pope, for the purpose of restoring it to agriculture,
awoke in Monti the idea of paying his debt of gratitude to the house of
Braschi, by commemorating this munificent work; he instantly began his
task, and named his poem from the guardian genius of the place. The
circumstances of the times interrupted his design: it became more
profitable to celebrate the ambition of Napoleon than the piety of a
captive priest; and the work was neglected, thrown aside, and almost
forgotten. During the last years of the poet's life, his friends
solicited him to finish it. Perhaps, when many years and many changes
had made much of his past life appear like an unconnected dream, the
memory of his early years came before him with all that charm and
vividness which youth often assumes in the eyes of age; and he was glad
to recur to a forgotten monument of bygone times. He yielded, therefore,
to the request of those about him, and had almost finished, when first
disease, and afterwards death, put an end to all his designs. It was
early in the year 1826 that he had thus renewed his poetic existence,
resolving not again to abandon it while his imagination remained
vigorous; but in the very opening of this enthusiasm, while every fear
was distant, and his active mind gladly met, each morning, the series of
duties and labour which he imposed on himself, he was seized by an
illness, through which every scheme and every hope was calamitously
overthrown.

On the 9th of April, at about eleven o'clock, when he had retired,
rather to study than repose, a sudden apoplexy attacked him; and no
medical aid, nor any care, could restore him again to health. He lost
the use of his left side, and the vital powers appeared mortally
attacked. The news spread through Milan, and struck every one with
grief; the population crowded round his door, and this public
demonstration of kindness sensibly affected him. His mind remained clear
and strong throughout the attack, nor was he without sanguine hopes of
recovery. In the April succeeding his first seizure, we find him writing
to a friend: "I burn with a desire to revisit Florence before I die;
consequently I have resolved, next June, to go to the mud baths of
Albano, near Padua, whence I hope to receive a renewal of my strength
sufficient for my journey." These mud baths, however, were pronounced
hurtful instead of beneficial to his disorder, and he never went. Still
hope was alive, and he lingered on until the autumn of 1828, his life
being consumed in a slow martyrdom: his death-bed was attended by his
wife and disconsolate daughter, whom, even to the last, he sought to
cheer by words of affection, and by smiles when he could not speak. He
expired on the 13th of October, 1828, at the age of seventy-four.

The genius of Monti would, in times of less public excitement, have
adorned his name with the highest praise; and his faults would never
have been called into view. The studious and imaginative bent of his
mind would have led him to cultivate letters and poetry; and we should
glory in the exalted fancy of a creative poet, without any shame for the
man. His domestic character was amiable; he was zealous for his friends,
grateful for benefits; generous, kind, and true in all the ordinary
intercourse of life: but neither reverence for genius, nor attachment to
the man, ought to blind us to his political tergiversation, or to
suppose that there is virtue in that inborn slavishness of spirit that
could see no degradation in praising those whom he reprobated in his
heart, and in commemorating with applause acts the most injurious to the
common cause of humanity. There is retribution in our own consciences
for all our faults, and Monti felt this: his love of glory was great,
and he was often pained by being reminded of his political apostacies;
but too often, when irritated by censure, he was willing to cast the
blame upon others, instead of admitting his own want of rigid public
integrity.

But take away this error, and, as a private character, Monti merited the
affection and esteem of all. The only fault of his disposition was
irritability and an inclination to anger; but he redeemed it by the
candour of his acknowledgments, and the uprightness of his conduct.
Warmth of heart and warmth of temper are too apt to be united in the
same disposition; but the kindness of his nature was rendered even more
apparent by this defect of temperament. He was sensitive to injury, and
his indignation was proportionate to his quick sense of injustice; but,
though his anger took the appearance of sternness and severity, it never
led him to injure another, but evaporated in words, and might be said to
agitate the surface, but never penetrated into the depths, of his mind.
He was never guilty of an act of revenge,--on the contrary, he often
benefited those who injured him. His mind was, in short, of a uniform
texture; and what it wanted in dignity and grandeur was compensated for
by gentleness, tenderness, and ready sympathy with the sufferings of
others. He was beyond measure charitable to those in distress; and
infinite and unwearied compassion, we are told by one who knew him well,
was his prominent characteristic. The poor gladly celebrated the
charities he strove to conceal. This virtue sprung, doubtless, from
early habits acquired under the roof of his benevolent parents. He was
simple as a child in the midst of worldliness, and the good faith and
sincerity of his friendships were without a flaw.

"In person," the same friend informs us who has furnished the public
with the principal documents on which this memoir is founded, "he was
tall and handsome: his forehead ample; the shape of his face regular;
and his eyes, gleaming from beneath his arched and full brows, shone at
once with a vivacious and soft light, which commanded both affection and
respect. An air of melancholy was diffused over his countenance, to
which the habits of reflection would have given a severe and even
disdainful expression, had not the sweetest smile illuminated it with
the gracious light of love. His carriage was dignified, his mien
serious, and his whole aspect was that of a man of talent, and of one
warmed and softened by the benevolence and affectionateness of his
disposition."

We may conclude with this description of the outward man, emanating from
one who revered and loved him as a preceptor and a friend. The world, in
the days succeeding to those of revolution and preceding those of
reform, was much divided between those who despaired and those who
hoped. The latter now triumph; but Monti died before the milder light
dawned on the world, and while change appeared inevitably accompanied by
bloodshed and misery. His compassionate heart preferred the peace of
submission, both for himself and others, to the suffering attendant on
defeated struggles; and errors springing from so humane a source may be
forgiven, even by those whose ardent natures lead them to overlook the
toil and danger of the journey, in the hope of attaining the
accomplishment of their desires.


[Footnote 52:  Maffei; Storia della Litteratura Italiana.]

[Footnote 53: Bonetti.]




UGO FOSCOLO

1778-1827.


The most necessary quality of an author is, that he should impress us
with the conviction that he has something to say. In reading his pages,
we ought to feel that he puts down the overflowing of his mind--ideas
and notions which, springing up spontaneously, force a birth for
themselves from the womb of silence, and acquire an existence through
their own native energy and vitality. An author, therefore, is a human
being whose thoughts do not satisfy his mind, ruminated on merely in his
own isolated bosom: he requires sympathy, a world to listen, and the
echo of assent from his fellow-creatures. But this is not all. Few men
can be excited by a mere abstraction, by the images of their own mind,
and the desire of communicating them for the benefit of their
fellow-creatures. Pride or vanity mingle essentially in the fabric of a
writer's mind: the pride which leads him to desire to build up an
enduring monument for his name, formed from his own compositions; or the
vanity that leads him to introduce himself to the reader, and to court
the notoriety which usually attends those who let the public into the
secret of their individual passions or peculiarities.

The three great authors of modern Italy form a singular contrast to each
other, as to their apparent motives for authorship. Alfieri, proud,
independent, and gloomy, sought at once to honour his own name, to exalt
and refine his countrymen, and to produce such works as would benefit
his species; while the vehement passions of his own soul were their
primal source and inspiration. Monti was a poet of the imagination. He
wrote because the imagery, the melody, the aerial fabric of poesy were a
part of his essence. The subjects of his poems were of less consequence,
in his eyes, than the well treating them, or the variety, grandeur, and
fantastic ideality displayed in his verses. Thus, at the word of
command, he could celebrate the usurper, taint the struggles of a noble
and free nation, and adorn the naked form of despotism with garments of
beauty. Foscolo, on the contrary, was impelled to produce and reproduce
himself: and yet to this assertion we must put some limit, for Foscolo
was a man of learning and taste, and he was capable of giving light to
compositions formed by the rules of art, and adorned by the graces
culled from an intimate knowledge of the finest of human works. But
vanity was still the mainspring,--a vanity accompanied by honesty of
principle and independence of soul, and yet which was vanity--the
worship of self--the making his own individuality the mirror in which
the world was reflected.

Ugo Foscolo was born in the island of Zante, about the year 1778. The
Ionian isles had long been under the dominion of Venice. The family of
Foscolo was of Venetian origin; and his father was a surgeon in the navy
of the republic. Little is known of his early years. He seldom mentioned
them in conversation, though his imagination sometimes delighted to
recur to the sunny land of his birth, and to regret it. In one of his
sonnets he exclaims,--


Ne più mai toccherò le sacre sponde
Ove il mio corpo fanciulletto giacque
Zacinto mia, che te specchi nell' onde
Del Greco mar.

Tu non altro che il canto avrai del figlio,
O materna mia terra; a noi prescrisse
Il fato illacrimata sepoltura.

O! never more shall I thy sacred shores
Approach, where my young limbs first sprung to life,
Beloved Zante! who look'st upon the waves
Of the Greek sea; and thou the song alone
May'st claim of thy lost son, maternal land!
For fate to him decrees an unwept tomb.


The Ionian islands were at that time held as colonies of the Venetian
government, and tyrannised over by the most odious and oppressive laws.
Among others, no schools nor colleges were allowed to exist, and the
youth of the islands were sent to Venice for the purposes of education.
At an early age, therefore, Foscolo repaired to the parent city. His
father, it would seem, was at this time dead, for we hear only of his
mother, to whom he was always tenderly attached; and it appears that
she, also, transferred herself to Venice at the same period. Foscolo
seldom mentioned his family, with the exception of his mother. He had
two brothers, one who died, it is reported by his own hand, about the
year 1797; the other enlisted as a soldier, and rose, from his good
conduct and valour, to the rank of captain of dragoons.

When boyhood was passed, Foscolo was sent to the university of Padua,
and studied under Cesarotti. There was great dissimilarity in the tastes
and literary opinions of the master and pupil; and thus Foscolo soon
displayed his original and independent turn of mind. Cesarotti explained
and commented upon Homer, and undertook at the same time to emend and
improve the verses of the father of poetry. He preferred Voltaire to
Euripides, and Ossian to Homer. While a great portion of ridicule
attaches itself to such paradoxes, the real learning and extensive
reading of the professor benefited his scholars; and by liberating them
from the narrow system of instruction which had subsisted for many
years, he introduced them, as it were, from the paled and guarded park
of classical literature, to the wilds, the moors, the incult mountains,
in short, to all the vast variety of unfettered nature.

Foscolo, though taught by the advocate of Ossian, was all his life a
worshipper of Homer. Studious, as well as ardent in his literary
pursuits, he became a critical scholar; and, admiring not only Greek
poetry, but the fabric and machinery which constitute its structure, he
modelled his own poetic productions on them, and made ancient mythology,
and allusions to classical history, the props as well as the ornaments
of his verses. At the same time he admitted Cesarotti's rules with
regard to the Italian language, and abandoned the dialect of the
Trecentisti,--so long held up as a model, and yet which had become a
dead tongue,--to form an animated, simple, living language, introducing
into it phrases and words of modern use; expressions for ever on the
lips of the Italians, though heretofore banished from their pens.

We are told that, on leaving college, Foscolo hesitated whether to enter
the clerical profession, which held out the prospect of competency to
its followers; but he was fortunately turned aside from a profession
whose narrow rules and arbitrary laws were in direct opposition to his
impetuous and independent disposition. Instead of assuming the tonsure,
Foscolo resolved to follow in the steps of Alfieri, and to acquire fame
as a tragedian.
[Sidenote: 1797.
Ætat.
19.]
He produced his drama of "Thyestes" at the early age of nineteen; and it
may be said to be a creditable production for a youth. It is from his
after works that we judge that it was not inexperience, but an absolute
defect of a certain species of talent, that made this boy's tragedy a
mere bald imitation of those of his illustrious predecessor. Alfieri was
not a fanciful poet; his talent lay in developing plot, animating
dialogue, and interesting the reader by the clash of passion, or the
concentrated feelings of a single person. Foscolo possessed far more of
the peculiar spirit of poetry; but it was of didactic poetry. He could
not invent incident, nor describe any feelings but such as originated in
his own heart. "Thyestes," founded on one of the domestic crimes of the
unfortunate house of Pelops, possesses all the faults of Alfieri's
tragedies. He imitated him in producing only a few personages on the
scene; so that, as a critic observes, it seems as if it were written
just after the deluge, when the human race congregated by threes and
fours: obscurity of plot is added to this simplicity of action, and the
purpose and aim of the poet is never clearly discerned. One scene
follows another, not because produced by the antecedent one, but because
it is necessary that something should be said and done, or all would be
at a full stop. The language is clear and energetic; but, as we are
uninterested by the ideas which it conveys, this must appear a very
secondary merit.

"Thyestes," however, succeeded in the theatre; and, as success in
representation is certainly the test of dramatic merit, we might suppose
some latent energy in its concoction, unapparent to the reader, but that
its success appears to have arisen from political feeling. It was acted
for the first time on January 4. 1797, in the theatre of St. Angelo at
Venice, to a vast concourse of spectators, and was repeated with
applause for nine consecutive nights. The extreme youth of the author
filled the audience with admiration, and he was called for after the
representation. We cannot well discern the political allusions that gave
it its chief interest, except that the name of king and tyrant are made
synonymous; a style, it might be imagined, neither distasteful nor
injurious to a republican government, however aristocratic. It would
appear, however, that this avidity for liberal sentiments was the cause
of its temporary success; for it was never again acted on any stage in
Italy.

Adversity meanwhile was hanging over the head of the poet. The fall of
Venice, which occurred in the autumn of the same year, deprived him of
the very name of country. Hatred of the Austrian is a sentiment
profoundly engraved in every Italian heart; and when Venice was made
over by treaty to the German despot, Foscolo became a voluntary exile.
Whether he was in danger of being marked out in any of the lists of
proscription does not appear; but as it is evident that he is the hero
of his "Letters of Jacopo Ortis," we gather from that book, that his
friends feared for his personal liberty if he remained, and besought him
to shelter himself, while there was yet time, from the enmity of the new
government. "I have left Venice," Ortis writes, "to avoid the first and
most violent persecutions. How many victims remain! We Italians
ourselves bathe our hands in Italian blood. Let what will happen to me!
Since I despair of good, either for myself or my country, I can await in
tranquillity a prison or death."

All these letters are full of the indignant struggles, and the sorrow,
as well as of the opinions which ruled the heart of Foscolo, as he found
himself driven a wanderer from his home, sometimes lamenting his own
misfortunes, sometimes those of his country.

"How many of our fellow-citizens repent their flight from home," he
writes, "and mourn! for what can we expect except indigence and
indignity--or, at the best, that brief and sterile compassion which
uncivilised nations offer to the stranger exile? And where shall I seek
an asylum--in Italy? Unhappy land! and can I behold those who have
robbed, scorned, and sold us, and not weep with rage? Oh! if the tyrants
were one only, and if the slaves were less abject, my hand would
suffice. But those who now blame me for cowardice would then accuse me
of crime; and the prudent would lament over, not the heroism of one
resolved, but the frenzy of a desperate man. What can be done between
two powerful nations, who, from being sworn, ferocious, and eternal
enemies, colleague to enslave us? and where force alone does not avail,
the one cajoles us with the name of liberty, the other with that of
religion; and we, debased by ancient servitude and new-born licence,
groan, betrayed, enslaved, famished, and yet not roused, either by
treason or famine. Ah! if I could, I would destroy my house and all dear
to me, and myself with them; I would leave nothing for the tyrants to
triumph over. Were there not people who, to escape the Romans, robbers
of the world, gave to the flames their dwellings, their wives, their
children, and themselves, burying their sacred independence among the
glorious ashes of their country?"

Thus passionately attached to liberty, Foscolo was not to be deluded by
the false halo that then surrounded the name of Bonaparte, or by the
fallacious promises of the French republican crusaders. "Another set of
lovers of their country," he writes, "lament loudly. They exclaim that
they are betrayed and sold; but, if they had armed themselves, they
might have been conquered, but never had been betrayed; and if they had
defended themselves to the last drop of blood, the conquerors could not
have sold, nor would the conquered have sought to buy, them. Many of our
countrymen imagine that freedom can be bought with money. They fancy
that foreign nations come from a disinterested love of justice to
slaughter each other mutually on our fields, for the sake of liberating
Italy. But will the French, who have rendered the divine theory of
public liberty execrable, become Timoleons for our sakes? Many,
meanwhile, confide in the young hero, sprung from Italian blood, born
where our language is spoken. But I expect nothing useful or noble from
a cruel and base mind. What is it to me that he has the strength and
roar of the lion, if he have the soul of a fox--and glories in it? Yes!
base and cruel; nor are these epithets exaggerated. Has he not sold
Venice, with open and boasted barbarity? Selim I., who caused 30,000
Circassian warriors, who had surrendered, confiding in his faith, to be
massacred on the shores of the Nile; and Nadir Shah, who, in our time,
massacred 300,000 Indians, are more atrocious, but less contemptible.
With these eyes I saw a democratic constitution signed by the young
hero; yes, it was subscribed by his own hand, and sent by Passeriano to
Venice for acceptance; and at that very time the treaty of Campo Formio
was already confirmed and ratified: Venice was sold; and the confidence
which the hero fostered in us all, has filled Italy with proscriptions
and exiles. I do not blame the reasons of state, through which nations
are sold like flocks of sheep; it was ever so, and so will it ever be:
but I grieve for my country, which I have lost. '_He was born Italian,
and will one day regenerate his country_:' others may believe this,--I
never can. I replied, and shall always reply, 'Nature made him a tyrant,
and a tyrant cares not for his country, nor does he possess one.'"

Ruminating on all these violent and bitter feelings, the offspring of
patriotism and adversity, Foscolo took the road to Tuscany. "In this
blessed land," he writes, "poetry and letters first awoke from
barbarism. Wherever I turn, I behold the houses where were born, and the
turf that covers, those renowned Tuscans; and I fear at every step to
tread on their remains. Tuscany is a garden, its inhabitants are
naturally courteous, the sky serene, and the air full of life and
health; but I am not happy here. I hope always for better things on the
morrow, when I shall reach another town: but to-morrow arrives, and I
pass from city to city; and this state of exile and solitude grows each
day more unendurable. We Italians are foreigners and exiles even in
Italy; and scarcely do we leave our little native territory, than
neither understanding, nor fame, nor blameless habits can shelter us;
and we are lost if we endeavour to distinguish ourselves. Our very
fellow-citizens look upon all Italians who are not natives of their own
town, and on whose limbs the same chains do not hang, as strangers."
Thus Tuscany afforded no asylum to the fugitive. He desired to see no
one in Florence except Alfieri; and the retired and reserved habits of
the count prevented his seeking his acquaintance. He saw him, as he
describes in one of his poems, wandering silently along the most
solitary bank of the Arno, gazing anxiously on earth and heaven; but,
finding nothing living that could warm his heart, he took refuge in the
aisles of Santa Croce, while wished-for death overspread his countenance
with pallid hues."[54] The silence and the concentrated melancholy of
Alfieri made a deep impression on the mind of his admirer; and Foscolo
sought afterwards to imitate it in his own person, forgetful that his
natural impetuosity and vehemence were very dissimilar to the gloom and
pride of his model.

From Florence, Foscolo pursued his way to Milan, which was then the
capital of the Cisalpine republic, and imparted its rights of
citizenship to all the wandering patriots of Italy. The new republic
afforded a strange spectacle: formed upon notions of Greek and Roman
liberty, picked up from learned priests, mingled with modern notions of
freedom, it displayed the most ridiculous anachronisms; and its members,
all Italians, yet strangers to each other, and regarding with oblique
looks all those born in a different city, met without amalgamating. The
young found hope and life in the new stage on which they were permitted
to act a part; and though ridicule and blame might be attached to many
of their public actions, still the more sanguine lovers of their country
hoped that, when the first springtide of enthusiasm should ebb,
prudence, unanimity, and strength would be the first born of national
independence. Foscolo, however, was not among those. Irascible and
misanthropic, and sensitively alive to the sufferings of his
fellow-creatures, he saw the evils around him, and desponded.

One of the advantages derived from this new capital was, that it served
to draw together the most distinguished Italians within the walls of the
same city. Each town of the peninsula sent some man esteemed for his
talents; and names, scattered before over the surface of the country,
now congregated together. Foscolo had thus an opportunity of becoming
acquainted with all his more illustrious countrymen. In his "Letters of
Jacopo Ortis," he mentions Parini especially with reverence and
affection; and he became intimate also with Monti, who then displayed
fervour in the cause of liberty, while his inward dislike for the
members of the actual government must have accorded with the sentiments
of Foscolo. Two decrees, passed at that time, served, indeed, to show
that blame deservedly attached itself to them: one was the law enacted
to deprive of office all those who had formerly written against
liberty--an act of despotism levelled expressly against Monti; the other
was the sentence passed by the great council against the Latin language:
whether it was because Latin was the language of their religion and the
priests, or from mere stupid barbarism, they passed a decree to prohibit
its being taught in the public schools. Foscolo saw, in the languages of
the ancient world, not only the root of all our knowledge, but also the
most splendid monuments of human intellect: he knew how fallacious and
trivial all translations are; he was imbued to the heart with a love of
classic lore; and he saw, in the suppression of the Latin, the paramount
influence of the French language. No wonder that he, as well as every
well-educated man, regarded such a law and its promulgators with mingled
scorn and disgust.

To make the resemblance between Foscolo and his imaginary hero, Jacopo
Ortis, the more exact, we are told that, at this very time, he fell in
love with a young lady of Pisa: his passions, naturally vehement, were
inflamed to their utmost by the influence of the most engrossing of them
all. The object of his attachment was singularly beautiful; her large
black eyes, rich raven hair, her dignified stature and noble carriage,
her whole person, in short, cast in the very mould of majestic beauty,
was formed to inspire admiration and love. She possessed also all that
natural talent which so usually falls to the lot of Italian women: her
voice was harmonious, and her proficiency in music great. She was known
afterwards to several of the biographers of her lover; and, with the
simplicity and frankness usual to the Italians, spoke openly of their
mutual attachment. One among them, after calling the lady "the flower of
all loveliness," adds, "We heard from her--for she yet lives--that the
few lines cited as being written by Teresa, in a letter of Ortis, dated
17th September, 1798, were a part of a letter which she wrote to
Foscolo."[55] Giuseppe Pecchio, in his Life of Foscolo, speaks of her
with great enthusiasm: "I saw her," he writes, "several times after she
was married, when, at a private theatre, she took the part of Isabella
in the 'Filippo' of Alfieri; and I still remember, with pleasure, her
dignified action and her expressive countenance, which filled the
audience with enthusiasm, and carried their feelings along with her."

This attachment was not fortunate; and Foscolo suffered all the throes
of disappointment and grief. Violent in all his feelings, love possessed
his heart like a burning fire; he grew sullen and gloomy, only breaking
silence by muttering a few sentences indicative of his ardent desire for
self-destruction. He did not openly speak of his passion; but his
feelings overflowed on paper, and he wrote and published "The Letters of
Two Lovers," a sort of novel, which afterwards served as a foundation to
the "Letters of Ortis." While thus occupied by literature and love, he
added the duties of a more laborious profession. Bonaparte, having
created the Cisalpine republic, strove to raise an Italian army for its
defence. The Lombard legion formed the nucleus of these troops, and the
sons of the noblest families in Italy accepted commissions: among
others, Foscolo became an officer.

[Sidenote: 1800.
Ætat.
22.]

The absence, however, of Bonaparte in Egypt, and the invasion of the
Austrio-Russian army, put a sudden end to the existence of the new
republic. At the same time that Monti fled across the Alps, and
wandered, a famished exile, among the ravines and woods of Savoy,
Foscolo, forced also to provide for his own safety, took refuge in
Genoa, and joined the French garrison commanded by Massena. It was here
that the French made a last stand, endeavouring to stop the progress of
the invading army. The siege of Genoa was formed; and Foscolo, serving
under the French banners, had an opportunity of studying at once the
military art and the science of government during the various chances of
a long and arduous struggle. While day lasted, there were perpetual
combats along the whole line of mountains which surround Genoa to the
north; and the night was spent in popular assemblies, in which the
leaders strove to inspire the citizens with resolution to endure the
evils of the siege. These soon grew intolerable; and famine, and
consequent disease, made frightful ravages. Foscolo sometimes collected
the people together in a spot of the city made famous by the act of an
Austrian corporal, who (1748) struck with his cane a Genoese, who was
striving in vain to move a cannon: he endeavoured to animate his
audience to heroic deeds, by describing the magnanimous vengeance with
which their ancestors had vindicated the insult. Nor was he less forward
in the performance of his military duties; and his name occurs in the
lists of those who were most distinguished for their bravery.

During the siege, on occasion of Napoleon's return from Egypt, and being
named consul, Foscolo addressed a letter to him from Genoa, which
prophesied the height to which he would hereafter rise, and besought him
to rest content with his present exaltation, nor to taint his
well-merited renown by schemes of unmeasured ambition. This letter,
which is of two pages only, is written with the freedom of a patriot and
the dignity of a disinterested and noble mind. He incurred no danger by
this address, but he displeased the ear of power; and the truth and
frankness of his representations form an honourable contrast with the
general adulation, and the barefaced flatteries, which other writers
addressed to the victor.

The energetic mind of Foscolo was not satisfied by the arduous duties of
his profession, to which were added the not less exciting task of
guiding and animating the minds of the citizens of Genoa, when they
flagged under the visitation of the most frightful calamities. It was at
this period that he wrote an ode to Luigia Pallavicini, on her falling
from her horse, which betrays no signs of the sufferings which he was
enduring, except its motto, taken from Horace: "Sollicitæ oblivia
vitæ." This poem is all grace, elegance, and classic allusion; but
there is no originality nor poetic fire. The machinery is mythological,
the imagery drawn from the same source; and it is rather the work of one
imbued with the poetry of the ancients, and translating remembered ideas
into his native language, than the outpourings of a mind inspired by
passion and nature. It is strange that Foscolo should have found time to
compose verses at a period when the town he inhabited was being
bombarded by the English fleet, when the Austrians were making daily
assaults, and the streets were filled by a famished and dying multitude.
But while Foscolo shared the labours and dangers of the garrison, he did
not partake their amusements; and while they were immersed in the
grosser pleasures of the bottle, of cards, and smoking, he took refuge
in his imagination, and found relief in the soothing and refined
feelings generated by study and poetry.

Meanwhile Genoa, reduced by famine, surrendered on the 4th of June,
1800, with the condition that the garrison should be conveyed to France
by the English fleet. Foscolo accompanied his fellow-soldiers, but he
endured only a brief exile from his country. The battle of Marengo drove
the Austrians from Italy; the Cisalpine republic was restored; and
Foscolo, together with the rest of the Italian fugitives, returned to
Milan.

Already known as an author and a man of letters, he increased his fame
at this period by the publication of the "Last Letters of Jacopo Ortis,"
a romance which at once acquired great popularity, and, as being the
first that had been written in the Italian language, demanded the praise
of some sort of originality. Yet its chief fault is, that it is an
imitation. Foscolo could not invent incidents, nor weave the artful
texture of a well-told story. The plot of "Ortis" is similar to that of
Goethe's more celebrated romance of "Werter." A youth of disappointed
expectations, and devoured by a morbid melancholy, falls in love with a
girl who is already betrothed to another. He resolves to die as soon as
the marriage shall take place; but, meanwhile, fosters his passion by
frequenting the society of the young lady. She had never been attached
to her intended husband, and is the victim of obedience to her father's
will, who, besides that his honour is engaged, would have found an
insuperable obstacle to the pretensions of Ortis in his plebeian birth.
His sorrowing daughter, while she obeys, returns the affection of her
passionate, adoring lover; her destined husband become jealous, her
father uneasy; and Ortis, called upon by duty and friendship, absents
himself from her society: he travels to Florence, to Milan, to Genoa;
and then, hearing of Teresa's marriage, retraces his steps to the
Euganean hills, the abode of his mistress, and fulfils his long-nurtured
intention of putting an end to his existence. The slight differences
between this story and "Werter" are founded on Foscolo's own attachment,
before alluded to.

There is, indeed, this main difference between the work of Goëthe and
that of Foscolo,--that the former is, so to speak, a dramatic, and the
latter a didactic, author. Goëthe founded his story on the feelings of
another. He delineated the sentiments and passions of his unfortunate
young friend Jerusalem; and, putting himself in his place, filled out,
from his own experience and imagination, the various portions of a
picture, the most highly wrought, refined, and true that, perhaps,
exists in the world of fictitious portraits. Foscolo painted a _beau
ideal_ of himself. So full was his mind of his own idea, that he
prefixed a portrait of Ortis, which was only a favoured likeness of
himself. Like the author, Ortis fled from Venice when it was made over
to the Austrians. Like the author, his heart was tortured by patriotic
sufferings, and his soul was in arms against the oppressor. Ortis, like
Foscolo, saw misery and evil rife around him: compassion rose with him
into a passion; and his heart bled and burnt alternately, as he pitied
the victim, and abhorred the tyrant. Ortis, like Foscolo, meditated
suicide as the cure for all evils, and regarded death as a harbour
whence to retreat from the tempests of life. Yet Foscolo did not, like
Ortis, destroy himself; because, we are apt to say, he is in this
greater than his prototype, since he felt powers and capacities within
him that led him to continue to endure the evils of life, to raise for
himself a name among his fellow-creatures, to benefit and to exhort
them; while Ortis, like a weak plant that wants all self-erecting power,
fell prostrate, and was trampled on by the iron heels of destiny.
Egotists, perhaps, are, of all people, the least likely to put an end to
themselves; yet they like to dwell on their own deaths, and, feeling
that the drama of their lives is incomplete without a striking
catastrophe, they ponder on it, and, if led to bring themselves forward,
are pretty sure to adorn their lives by describing its disastrous
conclusion.

This morbid shrinking from the woes of existence, this total want of
fortitude, added to a lively sensibility, presents a picture which, a
few years ago, was the model by which the youth of Europe delighted to
dress their minds. Men need a career--an hope, an aim: the French
revolution first gave new life to these natural instincts, and then,
aided by Napoleon's despotism, blighted and tore them up. Since then, a
better day has dawned, and men are glad to live for the morrow, since
each day is full of spirit-stirring expectation. The influence of a book
like "Ortis" is null now: it was pernicious at the time when it was
written. And yet, in representing his hero as a self-destroyer, Foscolo
was not without moral aim. The Italians fear death to the extent of the
most contemptible cowardice; they consider any one insane who engages in
any actions that even remotely endanger his life; and Foscolo was
earnest to prove that death was not the worst of evils, but that it
might be sought voluntarily as a refuge from slavery or woe. We find,
therefore, conjoined to intolerance of personal suffering, the most
ardent patriotism, integrity, and independence of spirit; lively
compassion for the physical evils of the poor, which are too often
disregarded; and observations on life and our natural feelings, full of
delicacy and profound truth. What more true than the remark, "that we
are too proud to give our compassion, when we feel that we can give
nothing else?" What can come more home to a man of sensibility than the
exclamation of Ortis,--"I am always in perfect harmony with the unhappy,
for indeed I always find something wicked in the prosperous?" And,
again, when he says, "Let us gather up a treasure of dear and soothing
feelings, which, during the course of years, destined, perhaps, to be
sad and persecuted, may awaken the memory that we have not always been
unhappy." Another merit which these letters have may be mentioned, which
an Italian author has also discovered: they display a love for, and an
observation of, nature, seldom found among their greatest writers. The
Italians, generally speaking, are not lovers of nature: full of passion
and talent, yet they do not ally themselves to the mighty mother, nor do
their pulses beat responsive to her varied and living phenomena. Dante
alone, perhaps, displays a true feeling for external objects, describing
them as they are, and as they may be supposed to feel; while the others
dilate rather on their beauty, as if they presented a scenic exhibition,
than were in themselves animated beings to feel and have existence. The
rambles of Ortis amidst the Euganean hills; the sentiments with which he
contemplates a tempest and the succeeding calm; the glories of summer,
or tyranny of winter; resemble those so often to be found in English
authors, and give the work a charm peculiar to itself. The style, also,
of these letters (and the Italians make style a chief merit) is pure,
elegant, and forcible. It created a language hitherto unknown to his
countrymen, uniting the familiar and colloquial with the tasteful and
the expressive. It is too rhetorical, even thus, for our ears; but the
Italians easily pardon inflation.

The success of "Ortis" was immediate and striking. The Italians usually
love to be amused and made laugh; but they were caught by the charm, and
content to weep over the misfortunes of the victim of love. The author
had artfully contrived to mingle himself inextricably with the image of
his hero; and the ladies of Italy were interested by his appearance,
uncouth as it was, and his manners, dissimilar to the inanity of their
usual companions. He became what we call "a lion," and he himself fell
in love with one of his fair admirers; but, as is too often the case
where the author is more thought of than the man, this lady's love was
more of the head than the heart, and Foscolo, after a short period, was
dismissed. We are told that this lady was the daughter of the courteous
Marchesa F., mentioned by Sterne in his "Sentimental Journey." True
passion often enforces sympathy; otherwise, we cannot wonder that
Foscolo did not create a sentiment in another as strong as that which he
himself felt. In personal appearance he was not formed to excite tender
admiration. Pecchio, who knew him at this time, describes him in vivid
but no attractive colours. According to him, Foscolo was of middle
stature, rather strong and muscular of frame; he had thick, reddish,
rough hair, which added to his expression of wild vehemence, and
rendered his fits of gloomy silence, or transports of rage, more
horrible. His eyes were of a blueish grey, small, deep set, and
intensely sparkling. His complexion was ruddy; his features well formed,
except that his lips, though thin, protruded, having that animal-look
about the jaw which is the opposite of the _beau idéal_ of the human
countenance: he wore his chin thickly covered with hair, which gave him
a sort of resemblance to an oran-outang. There is a story told of him
that a Frenchman said to him one day, "Vous êtes bien laid, monsieur;"
to which Foscolo wittily replied, "Oui, monsieur, à faire peur." On
another occasion he was engaged in a duel with a friend, who
impertinently compared him to the animal above mentioned. To add to the
wildness and singularity of his appearance, he was fond, in an awkward
sort of imitation of Alfieri, of appearing immersed in thought,
maintaining a gloomy silence, interrupted only as he muttered, or rather
growled forth, various quotations or verses, in a voice which made an
Italian young lady once name him "a sentimental clap of thunder." Such
was the outward appearance and manners of the Italian Werter; and if he
met with success among the fair sex, it must be attributed to the ready
sympathy they are apt to afford to sincere feeling, and to a generous,
independent spirit.

[Sidenote 1802.
Ætat.
24.]

When Bonaparte, under the name of first consul, rose to supreme power in
France, it became necessary to remodel the Cisalpine republic; and a
congress of 450 deputies was held at Lyons, to decide on the new form of
government. On this occasion Foscolo published an "Oration to
Bonaparte." A good deal of uncertainty exists as to the exact
circumstances under which this oration was composed. It has been
supposed that it was delivered publicly at the congress; but there is no
foundation for this idea, as Foscolo was not one of the deputies, and
did not accompany them to Lyons. It is said, on one hand, that he wrote
it at the desire of Bonaparte himself; and on the other, that the task
was entrusted to him by the triumvirate, who, under the title of
committee of government, were placed at the head of the Cisalpine
republic; and it is said that the oration was delivered before the
committee itself[56], which, considering its nature, can hardly be
believed. It commences with a grandiloquent eulogium of Napoleon; it
then diverges into indignant and sarcastic representations of the
mal-conduct of the heads of the republic. "Men," he describes them, "who
are neither statesmen nor warriors, formerly slaves, now tyrants, and
for ever slaves of themselves, and of circumstances, which they neither
will nor can command; conscious of their own vices, and therefore timid
and discordant; cowardly with the bold, bold with the cowardly, they
crush accusations by bribery, and complaints by menaces. Men who took
the arms out of the hands of the militia soldiery, an army formed of
citizens, to give them to bands of runaway felons and deserters." He
then dilates on the miseries endured in Italy during the period of the
success of the Austrians and Russians, and describes Bonaparte's return
as the advent of a demigod; and he calls on him to complete his work by
assuming the supreme command, instead of leaving it to the triumvirate,
who betrayed the cause of liberty and oppressed their countrymen.
Independent as Foscolo was, we are surprised when he goes on to say,
that every patriotic Italian would elect Bonaparte for their legislator,
captain, father, and perpetual prince. But this surprise diminishes when
we read on, and find that he expects this supreme ruler to gift the
subject country with liberty. He entreats him not to entrust the state
to men, but to laws; not to the generosity of other nations, but to its
own force. "Let such be your institutions," he exclaims, "such your
example, such our strength, that no one shall dare rule us after you.
Who, indeed, would be worthy to succeed to Bonaparte? As you cannot live
for ever for us, let the seal of our liberty be set; you yourself
leaving it inviolate: and, with the whole nation, I call freedom our not
having (with the exception of Bonaparte) any magistrate who is not
Italian, nor any general who is not our fellow-citizen. If, while you
live, our liberty totters, what hope have we that it will endure after
you are withdrawn from the earth? No! there is no liberty, no property,
no life, no soul in any country, and under whatever form of government,
when national independence is fettered!"

It is impossible that Foscolo, despite his assertions, and despite,
perhaps, his hopes, should not have been aware that the strongest chain
that can be imposed on the freedom of a nation is its having a foreign
prince at the head of government. Still he vindicated the cause he
espoused, by demanding national institutions and a national army. The
style of the oration is forcible, but too rhetorical; and, though full
of truths that intimidated the oppressors and did honour to the free
spirit of the writer, calmer representations and closer reasoning would
command more of our admiration. Not that such would have availed with
the conqueror: Italy was, to him, only one other lever added to the vast
engine of military force which was to raise him to the throne of the
world.

Yet, though not gifted with liberty, the present epoch was a happy one
for the north of Italy. After suffering from the persecutions of
demagogues, and from the devastations of war, it reposed contentedly
under the wise and liberal administration of Melzi. Foscolo continued to
inhabit Milan: by day immersed in study, his evenings were spent in
amusements. His sanguine disposition often led him to try the chances of
a gambling table: when he won, he launched out into extravagant
expenses; he bought horses and dress, and hired the most magnificent
apartments. When Fortune turned her back, all this show of prosperity as
suddenly disappeared; and he retired into a corner to study.[57] In one
of these intervals of seclusion, he wrote a translation of the Hymn of
Callimachus on the Hair of Berenice, accompanied by a whole volume of
comments. The sort of learning which he here displayed obtained no
applause; but we are told that the erudition thus made show of had for
its aim, not the instructing the ignorant, but the ridicule of pedants
and book-worms. It is difficult, however, to cull wit from the dry bones
of verbal criticism.

Under the presidency of Melzi, an Italian legion had been formed in
which Foscolo held a commission. When Bonaparte formed the camp at
Boulogne, for the avowed purpose of invading England, the division of
the Italian army to which the poet belonged made part of the vast
assemblage of troops called together. He held the rank of captain, and
was attached to the staff of general Tulliè. The Italian troops were
stationed at St. Omer and Calais, at which latter place Foscolo entered
on the study of the English language. The spot which he selected for the
purpose of study was curiously chosen: he was often seen writing with
eagerness by the light of the lamp of the billiard-table, while his
fellow-officers were playing, drinking, and conversing around.

To exercise himself in English, he undertook the translation of Sterne's
"Sentimental Journey;" and it is much praised for the purity of its
style. But the most curious part of the publication is a disguised
account of the translator. Foscolo's excessive vanity shines very
apparent in this account of himself, in which he indulges in an
egotistical description of his own singularities; and, according to his
old fancy, conducts himself to the grave, and writes his own epitaph.
The title-page of the translation declares the translator to be one
Didimo Chierico; and on the character of this Didimo (being himself)
Foscolo fondly dilates; mentions various works of his, the manuscripts
of which he says that he possesses; and records his eccentricities and
opinions in a manner which excites a smile, when we remember that he is
his own memorialist of trifles, which it would be hardly worth
mentioning when appertaining to the greatest men. "Didimo entertained,"
he tells us, "strange systems, which, nevertheless, he did not defend by
argument; and, as apology to those who brought forward irresistible
reasons, he replied by the single word 'opinions.' He respected, also,
the systems of others, and, from carelessness or some other motive,
never tried to refute them; but always remained silent, without making
sign of dissent, except that he uttered the word 'opinions' with
religious seriousness. On these systems or notions he founded actions
and words worthy of laughter. He called don Quixote happy, because he
deluded himself with glory and love. He drove away cats, because they
appeared to him the most silent of all animals; at the same time he
praised them, because, like dogs, they took advantage of society, and
enjoyed their liberty like owls. He did not believe that you could trust
any one who lived next door to a butcher, or near the place destined for
public executions. He believed in prophetic inspiration, and fancied
that he was acquainted with its source. He accused the nightcap,
dressing-gown, and slippers of husbands, as the cause of a wife's first
infidelity. He gave no better specimen of his knowledge: asserting that
the sciences were a series of propositions which had need of
demonstrations apparently self-evident, but substantially uncertain; and
that geometry, in spite of algebra, would remain an imperfect science,
until the incomprehensible system of the universe was known: and he
maintained that the arts could render truth more useful to men than the
sciences."

"When travelling, he dined at the public tables: he easily became
familiar, though he spoke dryly to the ceremonious, proudly to the rich,
and avoided all sects and confraternities. He frequented mostly the
society of women; because he thought them more richly endowed by nature
with pity and modesty, two pacific qualities which, he said, alone
temper the combative propensities of human beings. He was listened to
readily; though I know not where he found matter of discourse, since he
would talk a whole evening without uttering a word concerning politics,
religion, or scandal. He never asked questions, that he might not lead
others to answer falsely. He was glad to receive his acquaintances at
home; but when walking he liked to be alone, or with strangers to whom
he took a fancy; and if any of his acquaintance approached, he took a
book from his pocket, and, in room of salutation, recited scraps from a
modern translation of the Greek poets; on which he was left alone."

And thus he goes on, for several pages, describing eccentricities,
partly natural, partly assumed, which he wished should attract
attention, as is evident by his thus introducing them to the public, who
would otherwise have been ignorant of their existence.

[Sidenote: 1805.]

On his return to Italy, he became intimate with general Caffarelli,
minister of war of the kingdom of Italy. Warmed by the recent sight of
the encampment of Boulogne, he proposed to the general to make a new
edition of the military works of Montecucoli, with notes. The text was
furnished him by the marchese Trivulzio, and the edition was brought out
with great splendour; but Foscolo is accused of having used his
imagination, rather than critical acumen, in the emendation of his
author.

The north of Italy was enjoying a great degree of prosperity at this
time. Melzi gave encouragement to all undertakings that tended to
elevate the Italian character; and literary men were held in that esteem
which ensures their exerting themselves to bestow on their country the
richest harvest of their talents. Foscolo, though he still held his
captain's commission, was, in honour of his literary character, exempted
from the toils of service; and, taking advantage of the liberty allowed
him, he left Milan for a time, and took up his residence at Brescia. He
resided in a small house, situated on an open hill, not far from the
city. Here he was accustomed to study till sunset; and, whether alone or
in company, he would recite the poetry of the ancients, or his own,
which he was then occupied in composing. The Brescians are a happy, gay
people; they live less in the town than the inhabitants of the rest of
Italy, and take peculiar pleasure in rural amusements; they are
hospitable and fond of festivity; not very refined, they are yet
open-hearted and cordial, and noted for bravery when in the field.
Foscolo's neighbours admired and visited him; persons of every sect and
opinion, even the priests, flocked to his house; and often seated under
a wide-spreading fig tree which was in his garden, he held forth to a
numerous audience. The Brescians are naturally enthusiastic: he had the
art of inflaming the souls of the young, and they crowded round him as,
with stentorian voice, he uttered his moral apophthegms. When night
closed in, he left his rustic drawing room, and visited the theatres;
and was often seen paying homage to the dark eyes of some Brescian
beauty.[58]

It was here that he wrote the most perfect of his poems--his "Ode on
Sepulchres." The elegance and pure taste of this composition have caused
it to be compared to Gray's well-known "Elegy;" but it is more classical
in its ideas and construction, and would rather remind the reader of
Milton's "Lycidas." Every verse is harmonious music; and the melancholy
that is cast over it is graceful and touching, not harrowing and sombre.
A law had been passed at Milan instituting a public cemetery without the
walls of the city, in which all the dead were to be promiscuously
buried, without marks of distinction. The poet, addressing Pindemonte,
begins by commenting upon the notion that funeral pomp and an honourable
tomb are of no avail to the dead; and then he speaks of the sacred
sentiment that leads us to live still with our lost friends, and makes
the spot of their interment precious in our eyes. Alluding to the new
law, he apostrophises the muse, asking her if she does not love to
linger near the desecrated tomb of her Parini, whose venerated remains,
cast among the bodies of criminals, are scarcely protected from the
assaults of the houseless dog, while night birds hover, screaming, over
it. He speaks of the pious sentiments with which the sad relics of
mortality have ever been regarded since religion first instituted sacred
and social laws; and describes, in heartfelt but poetic language, the
various ways in which survivors love to pay homage to the beloved dead.
From tender and pathetic pictures of domestic bereavement, he then rises
to describe the ennobling sentiment inspired by a sight of the tombs of
the great and good. He apostrophises Florence, and gracefully brings in
the well-known predilection of Alfieri for the aisles of Santa Croce;
and then, taking a still higher flight, he describes Providence and
destiny as presiding over the graves of the worthy, and vindicating
their unforgotten names, even from the silent turf that covers them;
and, carried away by his love for classic lore, with no forced
digression, he concludes by speaking of the mounds that still mark the
spot where the warriors of Greece died on the Trojan shore, and
describes Homer, the poet blind and old, wandering around, and bestowing
on them the immortal fame of which they would otherwise have been
deprived.

This anatomy of a poem can convey but a slight and incomplete idea of
its merits. The harmony of the versification--the tender and soft
melancholy diffused throughout--the grace of the transitions--and the
continual rising in his subject to the end, are all lost. Nor could a
translation do justice to these, since, as evanescent as they are
delicate, they would be lost in another language. The whole poem is
Foscolo's masterpiece.

He also published at this time his translation of the first book of the
Iliad. Monti was bringing out his version, and there was much hardihood
in Foscolo's rivalship. His knowledge of Greek, contrasted with the
other's ignorance, no doubt instigated him. To remove any unpleasant
feeling, he dedicated it to Monti; in which he speaks at once with
modesty of his own attempt, and in high praise of Monti's genius. It is
difficult for a stranger to judge between the merits of the translators;
but even if Foscolo's is the best, it is a mere fragment. He never
published more than the first and third books; while Monti went through
the labour of the entire translation, and bestowed a complete work on
his country.

In 1808, Foscolo was installed professor of eloquence in the university
of Pavia--a chair formerly filled by Monti and Cesarotti. The choice was
universally popular; and his introductory oration, "On the Origin and
Use of Letters," was listened to with enthusiasm. He had refused to
introduce any praise of Napoleon into it, and the whole was conceived in
the spirit of personal and political independence. This fault was
visited with singular severity; since, after a short time, the
professorship of eloquence at Pavia was entirely suppressed, under the
pretence of a reform in the plan of studies, but in reality as a mark of
disapprobation. Petty jealousy and the vain desire of ruling even the
thoughts of the subject world, induced Napoleon on all occasions to
punish severely any demonstration of independence. Nor was the vengeance
confined to Foscolo and Pavia alone. The literary professorships at
Bologna and Padua were also abolished, as well as those for the Greek
and oriental languages; for history, and, in short, all except those
instituted to teach law, medicine, and the sciences. Several learned and
excellent men were thus deprived of an honourable living. The nation was
at once robbed of all easy access to a liberal education, and to the
inappreciable knowledge of those languages which contain the most
glorious monuments of man's genius: and thus Napoleon gave testimony to
the Italians of the truth of Alfieri's axiom, that absolute monarchs
hate the historian, the poet, and the orator, and give the preference to
the sciences.[59]

Foscolo retreated from the university to the seclusion of the Lake of
Como; giving proof of his pure and ardent love of nature, so rare among
Italians, by his retirement from cities to the sublime and luxuriant
scenery of this lake. He took up his residence at a villa named the
Pliniana, built on the site of the fountains whose periodical ebb and
flow the younger Pliny records in his letters. The lake, paled in by
mountains, bathes the walls of the villa; and the neighbouring banks,
clothed with myrtle and arbutus, overhang the waters, and cast their
deep shade on the clear depths: the precipitous mountain rises behind,
diversified by chestnut woods; and here and there are seen huge
cypresses, whose spires seem to pierce the skies, when regarded from the
terraced garden of the villa. The flowing fountains keep up a perpetual
murmur; and, perhaps, in all the varied earth there is no spot which
affords such a combination of the picturesque, the beautiful, the rich,
the balmy, and the sublime. The house itself, without being ruinous, is
huge and desolate; but its vast cool halls are a pleasant refuge against
the heats of mid-day. Here Foscolo studied through the morning, varying
his life by spending his evenings with the family of count Giovio, a man
of education and learning, whose young and gay family served to
dissipate the fumes of melancholy in which the poet was rather fond of
indulging.[60]

He here commenced his "Ode to the Graces:" this was a favourite
composition, yet left unfinished. He was never weary of altering or
improving--of softening its language, or adding new melody to the
versification. It is purely classical in its idea, yet varied by the
most beautiful touches of natural beauty. He occupied himself also by
finishing his tragedy of "Ajax." The same faults are discoverable in
this drama as in his juvenile production of "Thyestes." It is founded on
the dispute between Ulysses and Ajax for the arms of Achilles, and the
self-destruction of the latter. The action ends almost before it begins;
the scenes are frigid, the interest null; still it excited a good deal
of expectation; and reading, as he did, speeches and scenes to various
friends, its representation on the stage was looked forward to with
eagerness at Milan. The theatre was crowded on the first night, and the
audience sat patiently and listened for a long time to scene following
scene, of sonorous words, high-sounding declamations, and vehement
apostrophes, all leading to nothing, ending in nothing--exciting no
sympathy, but wearying the ear. At length they grew tired; and though
they listened to the conclusion, it was evident that they were delighted
to be dismissed.

It was a strange accident, that a drama which thus failed of eliciting
any interest in the audience, and the great fault of which was dulness,
should have excited a persecution against its author. His enemies spread
the report that the tragedy had a political aim; that Napoleon was
symbolised in Agamemnon, the king of kings; and that general Moreau was
pictured in Ajax, who deserved, but did not obtain, the arms of
Achilles. There seems to have been no real foundation for this
supposition, but Foscolo did not deny it: he preserved a mysterious
silence; whether from disdain, or from a covert pleasure in the
annoyance of government, is uncertain. The ministers of Napoleon were
inquisitorial and revengeful; not to praise their emperor was sin
sufficient to render any author obnoxious, and any expressions that
could be distorted into blame were criminal. The cities of Italy, whose
inhabitants are forbidden all political discussions, and who are shut
out from the pursuits that naturally excite ambition, are singularly apt
to diversify the monotony of their lives by gossiping. Such a
supposition as the one above mentioned spread rapidly through Milan: men
met together to wonder and dispute; they worked themselves up into an
idea that something had been done, and that something would ensue; while
the spies of the police excited and reported each unguarded expression.
The city became disturbed by the notion of Foscolo's attempt to bring
Napoleon on the stage as an object of censure, and in expectation of the
punishment with which his boldness would be visited; while he, silent
and mysterious, refused to offer any explanation. It was intimated
accordingly to him, that he would do well to change the air; and,
submitting to an exile from Milan, he again visited Tuscany.

He took the house at Camaldoli, near Florence, which had, in ages gone
by, been inhabited by Galileo. He alludes to this in his "Ode to the
Graces," in some verses which describe the nocturnal murmur of the
distant Arno, which flowed clear yet hid beneath its willows, and
visited the ear of the astronomer as he watched the star of eve. It was
here, he records, that dawn, and the moon, and the sun displayed to him,
with various tints, the serene clouds that hung below the Alps, or
illumined the plain which stretches to the Tyrrhene sea; a wide-spread
scene of cities and woods, diversified by the labours of the happy
husbandman, by temples; or the hundred hills with which, adorned by
caverns, and olive groves, and marble palaces, the Apennines encircle
the lovely city, where Flora and the Graces have garlands.[61] In one
point, the poetry of Foscolo may be compared to the more didactic parts
of Milton. He never omits a romantic or classical allusion; and,
bringing forward all that ennobles and animates his subject, adorns it
with human interest. Whoever reads in the original the verses I have so
lamely translated into prose, cannot help remembering various passages
inspired by the memory of Tuscany, which show like pictures of Claude in
the pages of the most graceful as well as the most sublime of our poets.

We cannot refrain from observing, in this place, that we possess a
proof, in the bent of Foscolo's genius, of how little the intellect is
often in accord with the heart. Wild, vehement, gloomy almost to
savageness, independent even to an incapacity of yielding to the common
rules of society, he could not depict the wild furies of Ajax, nor,
indeed, the more burning throes that often tore his own heart. His best
compositions, on the contrary, seem to emanate from an impassioned but
brooding spirit, nursed in soft melancholy and elegant and fanciful
reverie. As we have before mentioned, he was purely a didactic writer;
but perhaps no modern poet ever displayed so much harmony, grace, and
truth of description. We have not the fantastic imagery nor the fire of
Monti; neither the storms of the deep, nor the thunders of the sky; but
an inland landscape, where the balmy air broods over waving forest and
murmuring stream, and the heart of man reposing seems to take refuge


"In that sweet mood where pleasant thoughts
Bring sad thoughts to the mind."


[Sidenote:1813.
Ætat.
35.]

When the result of his Russian invasion shook Napoleon's throne, Foscolo
returned to Milan. Public events were undergoing a vast change.
Napoleon, defeated by his own ambition, retired to what seemed to him
the narrow circle of France, and appeared for a while to stand at bay,
while a universal attack was made on him. His authority, every where
shaken, tottered in Italy. The English, who had assisted so gloriously
in the emancipation of Spain, sent emissaries to Italy, to invite the
people to throw off the French yoke. It would have been of no avail to
have invited them to exchange servitude under France for that under
Austria, and the words liberty and national independence were pronounced
as a spell to rouse them. Lord William Bentinck published a manifesto
calling on them to assert their freedom; he conjured the soldiers to
vindicate their country's rights, and to acquire for it that liberty
which Spain, Portugal, and Holland reaped from the fall of Napoleon. His
voice found an echo in every heart. "We are told that the name of
independence was on the lips of all; nor at any crisis of any nation in
the world were so much ardour and unanimity shown, as by the Italians at
this moment."[62] While thus the allies tried to win the Italians to
their side, the treaty of Fontainebleau and the abdication of the French
emperor placed the peninsula at their feet. The viceroy of Italy, prince
Eugêne, crossed the Alps; the south of Italy fell into the hands of its
old rulers; while Milan, left to itself, assembled a senate to discuss a
new form of government. The point disputed was, whether prince Eugêne
or a prince of the house of Austria should preside over them; but they
fancied that their independence was secure under the one or the other.
The latter proposition carried the day; for when the senate, recording
the virtues of the viceroy, was about to solicit the allies to set him
over them, a vast multitude surrounded their house, composed of every
class--nobles, commonalty, artificers, rich and poor--even women of
rank joined in the tumult--crying out for the independence of their
country, and "No viceroy! No France!" A placard went about, saying,
"Spain and Germany have cast away the yoke of France from their
necks--Italy must imitate them;" while magistrates and people called
aloud, "We will have electoral colleges, and no Eugêne." The senate
fled--the people, roused to violence, rushed to destroy the partisans of
the French, and the unfortunate Prini was torn to pieces. Liberty (alas!
blood-stained) seemed to win the day; but it was a mock victory. The
electoral colleges were convened, and they created a regency; it was
decreed that the allies should be solicited to grant the independence of
the kingdom, and a free constitution with an Austrian but independent
prince at its head. Legates were sent to the emperor Francis, at Paris,
with these demands. He replied, that he also was Italian--that his
soldiers had conquered Lombardy, and that the answer would be given at
Milan. The Austrians entered Milan on the 28th of April. Bellegarde took
possession of it in the name of Austria on the 23d of May. The kingdom
of Italy was at an end; its independence was crushed and exchanged for
an ignominious and cruel servitude.[63]

At the commencement of these changes Foscolo remained unmoved. He
pursued his studies in silence and seclusion, and seemed to forget the
political crisis among his literary occupations. But when Napoleon fell,
he sided with the independents against the French party; though at the
same time he gave proof of his courage and humanity by exerting himself
vigorously, though vainly, to save the unfortunate Prini. At the same
time he resumed his military duties; and when the regency was
established, he was promoted to the rank of _capo squadrone_, or
colonel. To the last he took an active part in asserting the liberty of
his country. When the Austrian soldiers entered Milan, the city
submitted peacefully, but not silently. Six thousand soldiers of the
civic guard assembled, and, in presence of the occupying army, placed in
the hands of the English general, Macfarlane, an address which they
begged might be laid before the allies, claiming national independence
and a constitution. Foscolo drew up this address. We are told that it
was brief, energetic, and dignified[64]; a precious monument of the
author's patriotism.

But Foscolo was not allowed to reap any good from his firm adherence to
the cause of liberty. The Austrians looked on him with suspicious eyes,
and he was not popular among his countrymen. He had quarrelled with
Monti, and had many enemies. He saw no mode of maintaining himself: he
foresaw that he should be persecuted, and perhaps entered into plots for
the subversion of government. At this moment, some member of the
Austrian government, knowing the benefit that would accrue to their
cause if they could win Foscolo as a writer, asked him to furnish a plan
for a public journal. He consented, refusing at the same time to write
in it; but this slender act of civility was tortured into one of
apostacy by his enemies, and too late he found that he had given room to
calumny. Pecchio relates a conversation which he had with him, which, if
he did not suspect Foscolo of treason to his country, was unkindly
carried on by him. They met without the eastern gate of the city, and
Foscolo walked on for some time without speaking. At length he suddenly
addressed his companion, saying, "You, who are accustomed to speak the
truth both to friends and enemies, tell me what is said of me in
public." Pecchio replied, "If you continue your intercourse with
Austrians, your enemies will assert that you are their spy." This answer
was as a thunderbolt to Foscolo--his countenance darkened--he quickened
his steps, and said no more. The next day, without taking leave of any
one, without passport, and without money, he set out in disguise for
Switzerland. Whether his proud heart rebelled against continuing any
longer among his suspicious countrymen, or whether, as some said, he was
implicated in a plot among the soldiers, which was just then discovered,
or whether, hopeless and sick at heart, he yearned for new scenes and a
new life; whatever his motive was, he became henceforth a voluntary
exile, and, leaving friends and country, began an untried career; adding
one more to the number of unfortunate wanderers whom political changes
had driven from their homes abroad on the earth.

At first Foscolo took refuge in Switzerland, and remained for two years
in the city of Zurigo. He did little during that interval, except
publish a sort of unintelligible Latin satire, called "Dydymi Clerici
Prophetæ Minimi Hypercalypseos, Liber singularis;" which is written in
imitation of the prophecies of the Bible, and satirises Paradisi and
others who enjoyed offices in the fallen kingdom of Italy. Without a key
it is impossible to understand it--alluding, as it does, to people
little known, and to facts still more obscure; and when understood is
not praised, even by his countrymen, who might be supposed to take some
interest in a personal satire on men with whom they were acquainted.

Foscolo found tranquillity at Zurigo; and his disposition, not being
inclined to intrigue, would have permitted him to remain there in peace;
but he was poor, and obliged to seek a country where he could turn his
talents to some account. England, the refuge of exiles, was the place to
which he repaired. There were liberal men there, who, ashamed of the
part which the country had permitted lord Castlereagh to play, in
sacrificing to despotism the very men whose desire of freedom he had
sought to excite, readily and generously welcomed the victims of our
foreign secretary's cruel policy. Foscolo, on his arrival, was visited
by the most distinguished men of the country; the Whig party received
him with open arms, and he made one of the circle assembled at Holland
House. He was treated with all the cordiality considered due to a man of
integrity and a patriot, banished by a foreign despot, and refusing to
become the pensioner of the oppressors of his country; while, at the
same time, he met with the mingled respect and curiosity which an author
of acknowledged talents excites: and even lord Sidmouth, armed with the
terrors of the alien act, assured him that he should remain unmolested
during his sojourn.

A little time somewhat destroyed the illusion which first adorned his
name. The English are very ready to receive any one as a lion, but not
fond of fostering intimacies with any whose habits and manners do not
perfectly assimilate with their own. The vehement gestures, wild looks,
and loud voice of the Italian, were all in contradiction to the
etiquette of English society; and no foreigner is capable of perceiving
any thing but dulness and ice in the mild, high-bred, and unpretending
manners of the aristocracy of this country. The English enjoy society in
their own way; and there is a charm to us in the perfect liberty each
one enjoys--no one encroaching, or being encroached upon. But the
sensitiveness which leads us to give freedom to others, renders us
jealous of any assumption of it on their part. Foscolo had no real hold
on the society of which he made a part, except through his talents, and
the respect his independence and integrity commanded: but respect is a
cold feeling, and can be indulged while we keep the object of it at a
distance. His talents ceased to amuse, joined as they were to pride, to
vehemence, and to habits which would not alter, but could not please.

Foscolo ceased to be a lion; and he retired to the neighbourhood of St.
John's Wood, near the Regent's Park; and, surrounding himself by his
books, and visited by a few friends, he led a life at once retired and
eccentric. When Pecchio visited his friend in this retreat, in 1822, he
was struck by the apparent desolation of the spot (South Bank) in which
his house was situated; and at the same time by the appearance of three
lovely sisters, who were the household servants of the poet,--named by
his visiters the three Graces; in allusion at once to their beauty and
Foscolo's poem.[65] He supported himself chiefly by writing in the
Quarterly Review; and we owe to this mode of exercising his pen one of
the most delightful of his productions, the "Essays on Petrarch." These
are four in number: on the Love of Petrarch,--on his Poetry,--on his
Character,--and a Parallel between him and Dante. On the whole, we are
almost inclined to say that Foscolo scarcely does justice to the
generous, amiable, and faithful lover of Laura. The pride and unbending
disposition of Dante were more in accordance with his own character. But
the discrimination, the taste, and enthusiasm of these Essays render
them one of the most delightful books in the world. The volume in which
they are collected is enriched, also, by several of lady Dacre's
translations from Petrarch, which are unequalled for fidelity and grace;
preserving the spirit and feeling of the original, and yet arraying them
in flowing and melodious English verse.

Foscolo published also a translation of the third book of the Iliad; and
his tragedy of "Ricciarda." Though founded on a story of the middle
ages, there is no more interest in this last drama than his preceding
ones: the feelings and situations are forced and unnatural. Fraternal
hatred is the mainspring of the plot: Guelfo detests his half-brother,
Averardo; and, on the death of their father Tancred, goes to war with
him, to deprive him of his portion of their common heritage. As a
further mark of hate, he betroths his daughter Ricciarda to Guido, the
son of Averardo, merely to discover whether she loves her cousin or not;
and, finding that she does, separates them with violent denunciations,
and resolves to marry her to another. The drama opens while the brothers
are at war. On account of the unfortunate unities--which force the
author to bring all the persons together in one place, however
improbable it may be that they should there meet--the poet causes Guido
to leave his father's camp, and to secrete himself in Guelfo's palace,
for the sake of watching over Ricciarda's safety, whose life he imagines
to be menaced by her father. The action chiefly turns on Averardo first
sending a friend, and then coming himself in disguise, to induce Guido
to return to him; in Guelfo's denunciations against his daughter; and in
scenes between the lovers. At length Averardo assaults and enters his
brother's palace; and Guelfo, finding himself defeated, first kills
Ricciarda, to prevent her marrying Guido, and then stabs himself; while
Guido swears that he will soon follow his mistress to the tomb. The only
beauty of the tragedy consists in the character of Ricciarda, her
struggles between filial piety and love, her obedience to her father,
and her devotion to her lover. But the whole is conceived in one
unvaried tone of hate and unhappy love--of meditated murder and suicide.
You neither perceive the end that the author has in view, nor that there
can be any end except by their all dying. Foscolo dedicated this tragedy
to lord William Russell. His politics naturally brought him into contact
with what was then the opposition party; and this alliance was drawn
closer when the exiles of Parga applied to him to draw up the petition
to be presented to parliament. He assented gladly, and wrote four
hundred pages without avail; former treaties preventing the English from
interference in behalf of the Pargiotes.

Foscolo found difficulty in obtaining the means of life, and lady Dacre
in particular interested herself in pointing out some method by which he
might turn his talents to account. She proposed, and zealously promoted,
the course of lectures on Italian literature which Foscolo delivered in
1823. Mr. Stewart Rose was another of his real and anxious friends; and
Foscolo's acknowledged talents, and the interest excited by his exile,
facilitated their endeavours. His lectures were numerously attended, and
brought him a thousand pounds;--a small sum, if on it he was to found a
sufficient income to maintain him for the rest of his life; a large one
to an Italian, accustomed to look on a few hundred crowns as riches. And
thus it was that the success that attended his undertaking was, in the
end, fruitful of annoyance and disaster. The poet's head was turned--he
fancied his treasure inexhaustible, and he set about spending it with as
much knowledge as a child would have had of its real quantity and value.
He built a house, furnished it expensively, and adorned it with all
those luxuries that cost largely and are of least intrinsic value. His
entrance hall was adorned by statues, and he had a conservatory filled
with the rarest flowers; while the three Graces still waited on him, and
did not contribute to the economy of his household. As all the houses in
the suburb of St. John's Wood, which he continued to inhabit, are
distinguished by a name, he, to the no small puzzle of the common
people, christened his Digamma Cottage; in commemoration of a literary
victory which he believed achieved by his "Essay on the Digamma." "I
went to see him," Pecchio writes, "on my return from Spain, in August,
1823. I found him inhabiting a new house, surrounded by all the luxury
of a financier suddenly become rich. I was astonished, and could not
account for this sort of theatrical change; it appeared to me a dream.
I thought to myself, Ugo Foscolo has followed in the steps of doctor
Faustus, and has entered into some compact with the fiend
Mephistopheles. He certainly displays good taste; and if he be not rich,
he deserves to be so; and if all I see is not a vision, he deserves that
it should be real. But too truly it was a vision: little or nothing of
what I saw was paid for; it was the palace of king Theodore, tapestried
with promises to pay. His destiny was similar to that of him of whom
Young says--"


"A man who builds, and wants wherewith to pay,
Provides a home from which to run away."[66]


Poor Foscolo too soon paid the penalty of his inexplicable want of
common sense; he became pressed by his creditors, his goods were seized,
and he, threatened by arrests, was obliged to leave his villa, which so
resembled a castle in the air, and to hide in a lodging in an obscure
corner of London. He was now obliged to provide for his daily
necessities by writing articles for various reviews and magazines. The
merit and success of his "Essays on Petrarch" suggested to Mr.
Pickering, a London bookseller, the idea of an edition of Dante,
Petrarch, Boccaccio, and Tasso, with preliminary notices and critical
notes by Foscolo. The offer was tolerably liberal, being 600_l_. for the
whole work, if completed in two years. But even now Foscolo was ruined
by another mistake. Had he provided Essays similar to the admired ones
already written, adding a few critical and historical observations, it
had been well; he would have produced, at no great cost to himself, a
popular work that had repaid the bookseller for his speculation. But
Foscolo had already given token of a predilection for verbal and minute
criticism. His prefatory notice to Boccaccio consisted of a critical
history of editions, totally uninteresting to the general reader, and of
no value except to book collectors. The commentary on Dante is somewhat
less confined in its topics; and, with great subtlety and talent, he
compares various readings, and gives reasons for his own selection. But
even in this his observations are almost entirely grammatical and
verbal, though interspersed by others of great acuteness on the meaning
and intentions of Dante. Still his work, altogether, bore no similarity
to his delightful Essays, which portray the character, spirit, and
history of Petrarch and Dante in so new and attractive a manner.

Unfortunately, intense labour was required for a work so little alluring
or profitable; and Foscolo spent months collating, consulting, and
emending: producing, in the end, a work to be read with tedium and
fatigue. While thus diligently occupied, and at the same time harassed
by many cares, ill lodged, and full of chagrin and mortification, he
fell ill. He grew thin, and a tendency to dropsy manifested itself; the
consequence of an affection of the liver, from which he had long
suffered. A few friends visited him; and, dividing his time between them
and his literary labours, he never left the house. Yet his work did not
advance. He and his bookseller were at cross purposes. Mr. Pickering
desired a popular and saleable publication, which he supposed would cost
not much more time than the author's celebrated articles in the reviews.
Foscolo wished to immortalise himself by a work of labour and erudition,
which should become a text book and authority to all who hereafter read
or wrote upon the poets in question.

Anxieties thus grew upon him. Economy, and a desire for tranquillity and
better air, induced him to leave London; and he hired a small house at
Turnham Green. Here the last months of his life were spent A few friends
visited him: some of these were English; but they consisted mostly of
the exiles driven from the south of Europe by the ill success of the
attempted revolutions of 1820-21. The canon Riego was one among them,
who attached himself warmly to Foscolo, admiring his independence and
consistency. Meanwhile his disease gained ground, and it became publicly
known that small hopes were entertained for his recovery. This
announcement excited universal sympathy; and his rich or noble English
friends, who, from incompatibility of manners and character, had fallen
from him, came forward to offer assistance. The friends around him
declined receiving more than fifty pounds to meet the exigencies of the
moment; and even this supply was concealed from Foscolo, whose pride
would have been deeply and uselessly mortified by the sense of pecuniary
obligation. Money, indeed, was not the only kindness proffered: lord
Holland sent wine, the duke of Devonshire, game; but the kindness and
services most deeply felt, were those of the canon Riego, who spared no
trouble to assist and comfort his dying friend. Foscolo was sensible of
his friendship, but feared that it might become officious; and he wrote
to him, thanking him warmly, but entreating him to do no more. "I beg of
you," he writes, "and it is my most earnest prayer, that you do not
inform any one, man or woman, of my situation, for the purpose of
obtaining assistance. I make this fervent request, because I heard of
something of the kind from miss Florida. But your kindness on this point
would only cruelly torture my heart, increase the sufferings of my mind,
and the sickness of my body."

He lingered two months after this letter. On the day of his death he was
visited by his noble countryman, count Capo d'Istria, who, passing
through London to assume the presidentship of Greece, paid the homage of
a visit to the most renowned author of modern Greece. Foscolo was now in
a state of torpor, and unconscious of the honour done him.

To the last he was patient, submissive to his medical attendants, and
courageous; commenting on the inevitable advances of death with
fortitude and calmness. He died on the 10th of October, 1827. His
funeral was private and modest; his remains were followed to the grave
by five friends, and they were buried in the neighbouring churchyard of
Chiswick, where, a little to the left of the church, amidst a crowd of
tombstones, is to be found one, inscribed simply:


Ugo Foscolo,
Obiit XIV. Die Septembris,
A. D. 1827.
Ætatis 52.[67]


The character of Foscolo, and his literary merits, may be gathered from
the foregoing biography. Consistency was among his most prominent
virtues, for his writings and actions were in strict accordance one with
the other. He always rose superior to the blows of fortune, and
preserved his independence in the midst of the disasters brought on him,
either by the misfortunes of his country or his own imprudences. Vanity,
that assumed the appearance of disdain, rendered him difficult of
access, but compassion and warmth of heart were hidden by this outside.
Fearful of being thought servile, he ran into the opposite extreme, and
was little apt to praise even those to whom praise was due. Vehement in
his opinions, yet he disliked dispute; and if ever led into it, in a few
minutes sheltered himself again in silence. His heart was a stranger to
the feeling of hatred, but neither was he very open to friendship; he
was intimate but with few, and even with these he was reserved. He
preferred the society of women, and in early life loved with sincerity
and passion; and there was delicacy and refinement in all his feelings
with regard to the fair sex. As he expresses himself, in Ortis, "I have
been taught by some how to seduce and betray, and I might perhaps have
seduced and betrayed, but the pleasure I anticipated fell coldly and
bitterly on my heart, which has never been tamed either by time or
reason; and thus you have often heard me exclaim, that all depends on
the heart, which neither heaven, men, nor we ourselves can ever change."
The sincerity of his feelings had their reward--since his affections had
on some occasions met a return, which his uncouth appearance and strange
manners would never have commanded, and which was due only to his truth.
He loved solitude and study, was abstemious in his habits, but not of
strong health, and was often devoured by the deepest gloom. He spoke
well, and detested all artifice and deceit. To these virtues we may add
his constant attention to and affection for his mother. Strange, wild,
and imprudent, his faults chiefly hurt himself; and even the impetuosity
of his character seldom led him into any acts that injured or annoyed
others.

As an author, he may be said to be a bad tragedian, and not a good
novelist; but he was an elegant writer, conversant with the depths and
the refinements of the human heart. His subtle turn of mind led him too
much to verbal and minute criticism--his love of the ancients sometimes
injured the warmth and originality of his productions; but we may name
two among them as nearly perfect in their several species;--the "Essays
on Petrarch," in prose; and, in verse, his "Ode on Sepulchres," which,
for harmony, grace, sweetness, and pure taste, is perhaps unequalled by
any other poem in the world.


[Footnote 54: Dei Sepolcri di Ugo Foscolo.]

[Footnote 55: See the biographical notice of Foscolo, prefixed to the
"Ultime Lettere di Jacopo Ortis. Londra, 1829."]

[Footnote 56: Pecchio, "Vita di Ugo Foscolo."]

[Footnote 57: Pecchio.]

[Footnote 58: Pecchio.]

[Footnote 59: Hobhouse's Illustrations of the Fourth Canto of
Childe Harold.]

[Footnote 60: Pecchio.]

[Footnote 61: "Con elle (le Grazie)
Qui dov' io canto Galileo sedea
----a spiar l' astro
Della loro regina, e il desviava
Col notturno rumor l' acqua remota
Che sotto ai pioppi della riva d' Arno
Furtiva e argentea gli volava al guardo,
Qui a lui l' Alba, la Luna e il Sol mostrava
Gareggianti di tinte, or le serene
Nubi sulle cerulee Alpe sedente
Ora il piano che----alle tirrene
Nereidi, immensa di città e di selve
Scena--e di templi e d' arator beati,
Or cento colli, onde Appenin corona
D' ulivi e d'antri, e di marmoree ville
L' elegante città, dove con Flora
Le Grazie han serti, e amabile idioma."]

[Footnote 62: Storia d' Italia, scritta da Carlo Botta.]

[Footnote 63: Carlo Botta.]

[Footnote 64: Pecchio.]

[Footnote 65: It was on account of one of these Graces that Foscolo
believed himself obliged to challenge one Graham, an American. When they
met in the field, the poet received, but did not return, his adversary's
fire, and the affair terminated without a reconciliation.. Graham was at
that time a reporter to a newspaper, and had served Foscolo as
translator of his works. He afterwards got into difficulties, committed
a forgery, and was obliged to leave this country. Soon after, he fell in
a duel in America.]

[Footnote 66: Pecchio, Vita di Ugo Foscolo.]

[Footnote 67: There is an error in this inscription with regard to the
day of Foscolo's death, and also probably of his age, since it is
supposed that he was not more than forty-nine when he died. His
countrymen also regret that instead of the above inscription, that was
not adopted which he wrote for himself, under the feigned name of Didimo
Chierico, which runs thus:--

Didymi Clerici
Vitia: virtus: ossa
Hic: post: annos . . .
Conquiescere cœpere.]




END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EMINENT LITERARY AND SCIENTIFIC MEN
OF ITALY, SPAIN, AND PORTUGAL VOL. 2 (OF 3) ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
